Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 77, Special Issue, 2013, pp. 145–158
Exploring Measurement Error Issues
in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples
Theresa J. DeMaio*
Nancy Bates
Martin O’Connell
                                                                                                               Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
         Abstract	 The measurement of household relationships has a long his-
         tory at the U.S. Census Bureau, but recent challenges include accurately
         measuring the number of same-sex couples. In 2010, the American
         Community Survey estimated that there were 593,000 same-sex house-
         holds. In the same year, the census estimate for the number of same-sex
         couples was 902,000 (O’Connell and Feliz 2011). Same-sex couples
         are classified through two questionnaire items: relationship and sex.
         In an effort to understand the measurement error that might be caus-
         ing the estimates to differ, we compared questionnaire design formats
         and modes and conducted a sex-by-name analysis, focus groups, and
         cognitive interviews. The paper demonstrates that misreporting of sex
         rather than relationship was responsible for the overreporting of same-
         sex couples.
Introduction
In 2004, when Massachusetts became the first state to grant same-sex partners
the right to marry, the debate over same-sex unions became a front-page story
and a piece of the public agenda. Since then, six more states and the District
of Columbia have legalized same-sex marriage and the topic has become a
Theresa J. DeMaio and Nancy Bates are with the U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC, USA.
Martin O’Connell is retired from the U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC, USA. The authors
thank Robert Kominski, Diana Elliott, Daphne Lofquist, and all those involved in conducting
the research described in this paper. They also thank Peter Miller and three anonymous review-
ers for helpful comments on a previous version of the paper. This report is released to inform
interested parties of research and to encourage discussion. The views expressed are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the U.S. Census Bureau. *Address correspondence to Theresa
J. DeMaio, U.S. Census Bureau, 4600 Silver Hill Road, Washington, DC 20233, USA; e-mail:
Theresa.j.demaio@census.gov.
doi:10.1093/poq/nfs066
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Association for Public Opinion Research 2013.

146                                                  DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
presidential campaign issue. But, despite the public and legal debate, enu-
merating gay and lesbian couples in the United States remains challenging.
This is especially true of same-sex couples who have formalized their relation-
ships with some type of legally recognized status such as a marriage, domestic
partnership, or civil union. Yet legislative bodies, courts, and voters are mak-
ing decisions—for example, whether basic legal rights and safeguards will be
afforded, such as partner health insurance, survivor benefits, or hospital visita-
tion—that affect the day-to-day lives of this population. To inform the debate,
                                                                                              Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
accurate classification and enumeration is essential. Without them, social sci-
entists, lawmakers, and policy advocates alike cannot begin to assess the size,
composition, health, or welfare status of these households or the economic
impact of expanding marriage rights.
Measurement Error in Counting Same-Sex Couples
The task of accurately measuring same-sex couple relationships is challenging
for a number of reasons. U.S. laws recognizing same-sex couples vary on a
state-by-state basis, and federal law does not recognize same-sex partnerships.
   The Census Bureau tabulates same-sex couples in both the American
Community Survey (ACS) and the decennial census. Two questions are used
to identify same-sex couples: relationship and sex. The agency follows edit
rules that are used to change data values for seemingly contradictory answers.
The edit rules for combining information from relationship and sex have
evolved since the category of unmarried partner was added in 1990. In that
census, if a household consisted of a married couple and both spouses reported
the same sex, the relationship category remained husband or wife, but the sex
of the partner who reported being a spouse to the householder was changed.
In 1996, the Federal Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) included a provision
that federal agencies recognize only opposite-sex couples when defining a
married couple for federal program purposes. Partly in response to DOMA, in
the 2000 and 2010 Censuses, sex was assumed accurate and left as reported,
and the relationship of partners in same-sex couples that selected “husband or
wife” was changed to “unmarried partner.”1
   The Census Bureau did produce a special tabulation of Census 2010 state-
level counts of same-sex couples broken out by relationship type. For this tabu-
lation only, same-sex partners who indicated their relationship as “husband or
wife” were classified as same-sex married households (i.e., the edit rule was not
applied). Persons reporting their relationship to the householder as “unmarried
partner” were categorized as same-sex unmarried partner households.
1.  For more information on how same-sex couples were edited in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses,
see U.S. Census Bureau (2000, p. 37).

Measurement Error in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples                                            147
Table 1. Same-Sex Couple Households: 2008–2010 American
Community Survey Estimates, 2010 Census, and Administrative Records
                             Number of Same-Sex Households
                     American Community Survey
                                                                  2010          Administrative
                    2008            2009           2010          Census           records
Married           150,000         152,000        152,000         349,000             50,000
                                                                                                     Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
Unmarried
  partners        415,000         429,000        441,000         553,000              N/A
   In 2010, estimates from the ACS indicated that there were 593,324
same-sex couple households in the United States (O’Connell and Feliz
2011). Of these, 26 percent reported their relationship as “husband/wife”
and the other 74 percent reported it as “unmarried partner.” Across the
2008–2010 ACS, the total number of same-sex households and the dis-
tribution of married couples to unmarried partner couples was stable (see
table  1). However, a larger total number of same-sex couple households
was reported in the 2010 Census, much of it coming from same-sex mar-
ried households (349,000 according to the census versus around 152,000
according to the ACS).
   Another study, conducted by the UCLA Williams Institute, estimated the
number of same-sex couples who formalized their relationships in the United
States. These authors consulted state agency databases on marriage, domestic
partnership, civil unions, and other beneficiary agreements afforded same-sex
couples.2 The report estimated that about 134,000 same-sex couples, or 21 per-
cent of all U.S. same-sex couples, were currently in a legally recognized rela-
tionship and around 50,000 of these same-sex couples were married within the
United States (Badgett and Herman 2011).3
   In this paper, we explore the difference in the estimates from the 2010 ACS
and 2010 Census and the Williams Institute. We examine both the relationship
and sex questions in the ACS and census as sources of measurement error. Our
study includes a comparison of questionnaire design formats and modes, a
sex-of-name analysis, focus groups, and cognitive interviews.
2. In some states, the gender of married couples is recorded, but in many others, this information
is not captured. Consequently, the number of same-sex married couples is based on a mixture of
administrative records, estimates from state court representatives, and estimates based on mar-
riage counts before and after same-sex marriage laws were enacted.
3.  The 50,000 figure includes marriages since 2004 and couples who entered civil unions that
were automatically converted to marriages in Connecticut and New Hampshire.

148                                                      DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
Potential Explanations for Measurement Error
in Classifying Same-Sex Couples
Identification of same-sex couples in these data is based on relationship and
sex. Although sex is a straightforward question for most people, reporting
errors do occur. One potential explanation why the 2010 Census yielded a
higher number of same-sex married couples is that a small proportion of errors
in reporting sex occurred among the large married heterosexual population.
                                                                                                  Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
Such errors would produce an abundance of false “same-sex” married cou-
ples. Although there is no consensus on the precise number of errors, previous
studies concluded that the number of same-sex married couples is probably
inflated because sex was mismarked (O’Connell and Gooding 2006; Black
et al. 2007; Gates and Steinberger 2009).
   Another reason for the inflated estimate might be the perception by same-
sex couples that their committed relationships are equivalent to marriage. As
same-sex unions have become more accepted and mainstream, some couples
may have adopted the terms “husband/wife” to describe their relationship even
without the legal recognition of marriage. Similarly, same-sex couples may
engage in non-government-sanctioned ceremonies to recognize their rela-
tionship or enter into legal domestic partnerships or civil unions (Hull 2006).
These actions may influence how couples perceive themselves and report their
relationship on official forms.
Reporting of Sex by Members of Opposite-Sex Couples
To investigate how often members of opposite-sex couples mismark the sex
item, we examine data from the 2010 ACS and 2010 Census. Each study has
distinguishing design features that allow us to determine how and where errors
might occur.
   The 2010 Census employed a multi-mode design with a mail-out/mail-back
initial phase. The mail questionnaire used a sequential format in which demo-
graphics were collected in a person-by-person sequence running from the top
to the bottom of the page (figure 1). The sex and relationship questions used
to classify the same-sex couple’s relationship were placed one after the other,
and the response option check boxes for the sex item were placed horizontally.
For households that did not mail back a census form, the nonresponse follow-
up (NRFU) phase used a paper-and-pencil instrument that was administered in
person or over the phone by temporary census enumerators. Demographic items
were formatted using a matrix or grid design with items arranged horizontally on
the page from left to right. Response check boxes for the sex item were arranged
vertically. (See figure 2 and table 2 for a summary of design differences.)4
4.  For entire forms, see online appendices 1 and 2 (please see the supplementary data online).

Measurement Error in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples                                                                                     149
          1. Print name of Person 2
                  Last Name
                  First Name                                                                                        MI
          2. How is this person related to Person 1? Mark IJX ONE box.
                       Husband or wife                                    Parent-in-law
                                                                                                                                             Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
                       Biological son or daughter                         Son-in-law or daughter-in-law
                       Adopted son or daughter                            Other relative
                       Stepson or stepdaughter                            Roomer or boarder
                       Brother or sister                                  Housemate or roommate
                       Father or mother                                   Unmarried partner
                       Grandchild                                         Other nonrelative
          3. What is this person’s sex? Mark IJX ONE box.
                       Male               Female
Figure 1. Relationship and Sex Items from the 2010 Census Mail Form.
1.   Let’s make a list of all those people. Please start with   2.   Please look at list B on the Information         3.   Is (Name)
     the name of an owner or renter who was living here              Sheet. How is (Name) related to (Read name            male or
     on April 1. Otherwise, start with any adult living here.        of Person 1)?                                         female?
                                                                     Mark X ONE box.                                  Mark X ONE box.
Person 1                                                        X Person 1                                                     Male
     First Name                                     MI                                                                         Female
     Last Name
Person 2
                                                                     Husband or wife              Son-in-law or                Male
                                                                     Biological son or daughter   daughter-in-law              Female
     First Name                                     MI
                                                                     Adopted son or daughter      Other relative
                                                                     Stepson or stepdaughter      Roomer or boarder
     Last Name                                                       Brother or sister            Housemate
                                                                     Father or mother             or roommate
                                                                     Grandchild                   Unmarried partner
                                                                     Parent-in-law                Other nonrelative
Figure 2. Relationship and Sex Items from the 2010 Census Non-response
Follow-Up Form.
   We are not aware of any study that directly assesses whether the two for-
mats differ in how often sex is misreported, but two studies are worth men-
tioning. The first is a small eye-tracking study (N  =  13), which concluded
that respondents navigated demographic items more variably in a matrix than
in a sequential design. Although most participants in the matrix format did
not answer questions on a person-by-person basis, most who received the

150                                                    DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
Table 2. Summary of Differences in Design between 2010 Census and
2008–2010 American Community Survey
Phase of data                                                          2008–2010 American
collection       Design feature                2010 Census             Community Survey
Initial data     Mode of data collection       Paper by mail       Paper by mail
   collection    Person recording              Household member Household member
                   responses                     or proxy            or proxy
                                                                                                 Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
                 Layout of questions for       Sequential/vertical Sequential/vertical
                   a single person
                 Layout of sex response        Horizontal              Horizontal
                   categories
Nonresponse      Mode of data Collection   Paper (in person or Computer (in person
  follow-up                                  telephone)          or telephone)
  (NRFU)         Person recording          Temporary           Permanent
                   responses                 enumerator          Census Bureau
                                                                 interviewer
                 Layout of questions for   Grid/horizontal     One screen per
                   a single person                               question
                 Layout of sex response    Vertical            NA—programmed
                   categories                                    questions
                 Verification for same-sex No                  Yes
                   married household
sequential format did (Ashenfelter 2012). The second study was a mail split-
panel test to compare response distributions in a matrix and sequential layout.
This investigation reported that for all of the demographic items, the incidence
of missing data was similar for both forms or lower for the sequential for-
mat (U.S. Census Bureau 2008). Together, these studies suggest the potential
for more sex misreporting in the matrix format, especially since the quickly
trained census enumerators were using the matrix form.
   The 2010 ACS also employed a multi-mode design with mail offered first.
The layout and sequencing of demographic questions were practically identi-
cal to the 2010 Census mail form. But, unlike in the census, households that
did not return a mail form were followed up with computer-assisted telephone
interviewing (CATI) or computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI). In
CATI/CAPI cases where the householder’s husband/wife was recorded as the
same sex as the householder, both instruments had an automatic edit requiring
interviewers to verify the relationship and sex items.5
   To explore the discrepancies depicted in table 1, we break down the data
by mode of response (table  3). In both the census and ACS mail response
modes, about 0.7 percent of all households indicated that they were same-sex
5.  The edit verified only same-sex husband/wife households, not unmarried partner households.

Measurement Error in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples                             151
Table 3. Percent of Households Reporting as Same-Sex Couple
Households (Unmarried Partner + Married Households Combined) by
Response Mode: 2010 Census and American Community Survey 2010
Estimates
                                                                2010 American
                                      2010 Census              Community Survey
Mail forms                               0.724                        0.667
                                                                                     Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
Non-mail forms                           0.934a                       0.322b
All forms                                0.773                        0.518
  a
   Forms were paper with a horizontal/grid structure.
  b
   Forms were CATI/CAPI instruments.
households. However, in the nonresponse follow-up phase, differences emerge.
The percent of households reported as same sex in the ACS CATI/CAPI data
collection is far lower (0.322) than that reported by the census NRFU data
collection (0.934). The lower proportion in the ACS is likely a function of
the automatic pop-up edit requiring interviewers to confirm same-sex married
households. To better understand the larger number coming from the NRFU
forms, we use a metric designed to quantify the number of opposite-sex cou-
ples who were counted erroneously as same-sex couples.
   Because we lack information from a reinterview, we used an indirect
method of evaluation based on consistency between first name reported on
the form and the response recorded for sex. The Census Bureau has developed
statistical “name directories,” which are files of first names associated with
a probability index that identifies the “maleness” of the name. These name
directories for the 2010 Census were developed for each state. The probability
index (from 0 to 1,000) for each name was constructed by taking the ratio of
the number of times a name was recorded with a male response to the sex item
to the total number of times a name was recorded as either male or female. For
example, an index of 950 indicates that when a name appeared in the census
for a given state, 950 times out of 1,000 the person was a male. An index of 20
would indicate that 980 times out of 1,000 that name was identified as being
reported female. Clearly, age and cultural and geographical differences may
affect this probability, and census directories prepared at the state level partly
address these issues.
   We used consistency with this index to evaluate a person’s report of their
sex. After examining several cutoffs, we selected a threshold of 0–50 to indi-
cate an error in households classified as male-male, and a level of 950–1,000
to indicate an error in households classified as female-female. This conserva-
tive approach was selected to minimize the likelihood that a name with an
ambiguous sex (for example, Morgan or Kelly) would be classified as an error
when the sex was reported correctly. To estimate how often sex was probably

152                                            DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
recorded incorrectly for relationships classified as “same-sex unmarried part-
ners,” an inconsistency ratio was constructed showing the number of same-sex
unmarried partners with inconsistent name and sex reports per 100 opposite-
sex unmarried partner households. Similarly, for same-sex spouses, the ratio
was the number of same-sex spouses with inconsistent name and sex reports
per 100 opposite-sex spouses. No household was classified as a same-sex mar-
ried household if either the sex or the relationship item for either the house-
holder or the spouse had been changed or imputed in any way in the editing
                                                                                    Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
process.
   We found different levels of inconsistency in name and sex reporting in self-
enumerated (mail) forms versus interviewer-administered NRFU forms for both
unmarried partners and spouses. The name-sex inconsistency at the national
level is three to four times higher when the data were collected on NRFU forms
as opposed to mail forms; for both unmarried partners and spouses, there were
about 1.1 inconsistent reports per 100 comparable couples for NRFU forms and
0.2–0.3 inconsistent reports per 100 comparable couples for the mail forms.
This suggests that the recording error arises in the census NRFU operation.
Some hypothesized causes include the matrix sequencing of the NRFU form,
the placement of check boxes for recording sex on the NRFU form, and the
quickly trained temporary workforce. Although these inconsistency ratios
may seem trivially small, their effect is greatly magnified when applied to the
extremely large population bases of 56.5 million opposite-sex married and 6.8
million opposite-sex unmarried partners in Census 2010.
   As a result of this reporting error, 28.3 percent of reported same-sex cou-
ple households in Census 2010 are likely to be opposite-sex households (see
figure 3). About one-half of the same-sex couple households reported on the
NRFU forms were probably data-reporting errors, compared with 20 percent
of same-sex households reported on the mail forms.
   Because there are so many more opposite-sex spouses than partners to
potentially generate reporting errors, errors by opposite-sex spouses result
in a greatly inflated number of misclassified same-sex married households.
Figure 3 shows that 7 percent of same-sex unmarried partners are estimated
to have errors, compared with 62 percent of same-sex spouses. These data
strongly indicate that data-collection errors by opposite-sex couple house-
holds who responded during NRFU inflated estimates of same-sex couples.
Reporting of Relationship
Errors in the reporting of the relationship could occur for at least two reasons.
First, the item involves a long list of options (fifteen in the ACS and fourteen
in the census). “Husband/wife” is the first category, and “unmarried partner”
is next (or third) to last. Second, as society has expanded the recognition of
same-sex partnerships, some unmarried same-sex couples may perceive their

   Measurement Error in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples                                                                153
                                  80
Percent with inconsistent names
                                                                                                              68.9
                                  70
                                                                                                62.3
                                  60                                                                   56.9
                                                      50.2
                                  50
                                  40
                                       28.3
                                  30
                                                                                                                           Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
                                              19.8                               21.5
                                  20
                                  10                                6.9
                                                                          3.7
                                   0
                                              Total              Unmarried partners            Reported Married
                                                             All forms    Mail          NRFU
   Figure  3. Percentage of Same-Sex Couple Households (Unmarried
   Partner + Married Households Combined) with Inconsistent Name-Sex
   Reporting, by Response Mode: 2010 Census.
   committed relationships as equivalent to marriage. We had no definitive way
   to measure the consistency of relationship reporting for same-sex couples.
   However, the Census Bureau sponsored a series of eighteen focus groups and
   forty cognitive interviews to investigate how members of same-sex couples
   report their relationship on Census Bureau questionnaires.
      Focus groups were conducted with same- and opposite-sex cohabitating
   couples in seven geographically diverse areas, including states where same-
   sex marriage is legal, same-sex domestic partnerships are legal, and no legal
   recognition exists.6 The groups explored the meaning and interpretation of
   the 2010 Census relationship item and whether respondents interpreted the
   question as asking about legally defined relationships or something else (see
   figure 1).
      Discussions about how participants answered the relationship item yielded
   several findings that were consistent across sexual orientation and geographic
   area. For example, across the board, participants reported that they perceived
   the question to be asking about a legal status, probably because the form
   comes from a federal agency. Consequently, very few people who were not
   6. San Francisco, CA; Boston, MA; Houston, TX; Topeka and Wichita, KS; Ft. Lauderdale, FL;
   three rural locations in GA; and Washington, DC. Recruitment in cities was conducted by a les-
   bian, gay, bisexual, transgender marketing group. Recruiting in rural locations was conducted
   through personal contact by the focus group moderators in gay-friendly churches; local gay bars,
   bookstores, and restaurants; and advertisements in gay media. A  table summarizing the focus-
   group characteristics and the protocols are available in online appendices 3 and 4 (please see the
   supplementary data online).

154                                                      DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
legally married marked the “husband/wife” category on the form. We also
found that legally married same-sex couples reported “husband/wife” regard-
less of whether the marriage was recognized in their state of residence. This
occurred for every legally married focus-group respondent from Boston to
rural Georgia. Although participants recognize that there is no federal recogni-
tion of same-sex marriage, having been legally married anywhere translated to
“husband/wife,” even on a federal form.
   Same-sex participants reacted negatively to the placement of the “unmar-
                                                                                                     Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
ried partner” category. They felt that this category was functionally equivalent
to the “husband/wife” category in terms of commitment and responsibilities
and should be moved toward the top. Based on this research and input from
an expert advisory panel, two alternative versions were developed. Revisions
included adding “spouse” to the “husband/wife” category, placing the “unmar-
ried partner” category second in the list in one version, and adding the deline-
ation of “same-sex” and “opposite-sex” qualifiers before the “husband/wife/
spouse” and “unmarried partner” categories in the other (see figure 4).7
   These two versions of the relationship question were then tested in forty
cognitive interviews conducted in four geographic areas with differing lev-
els of same-sex partner recognition8 and with respondents who comprised a
mixture of sexual orientations and relationship statuses.9 The target questions
were tested in an abbreviated ACS mail-out questionnaire.10 Respondents
completed one version of each question initially (randomly assigned) and then
completed the other version at the end of the interview.11
   The cognitive interviews supported much of what was heard in the focus
groups. For example, regardless of version tested, the majority of respondents
in the cognitive interviews chose their intimate-partner relationship answer
according to the legal status of the relationship (see table 4). This meant that
7.  Due to time and resource constraints, only one version distinguishing between spouses and
unmarried partners for both same-sex and opposite-sex couples was tested. Based on the focus-
group results, we put the two “husband/wife/spouse” categories together, followed by the two
“unmarried partner” categories.
8. Ohio and North Carolina (no recognition), Nevada (same- and opposite-sex domestic part-
nership recognition), and the Washington, DC, metropolitan area (DC—same-sex marriage;
Maryland—recognizes same-sex marriage but doesn’t issue licenses; Virginia—no legal
recognition).
9. We recruited same-sex cohabitating couples without legal status; same-sex or opposite-sex
couples in registered domestic partnerships or civil unions; opposite-sex married couples; and two
sets of same-sex married couples—those living where same-sex marriage is recognized and those
living where it is not. A table summarizing the respondent characteristics and the protocols are
available in online appendices 5 and 6 (please see the supplementary data online).
10.  The questionnaire included name, relationship, sex, age, date of birth, place of birth, citi-
zenship, year of entry to the United States, education, language spoken at home, marital status,
marital history, and fertility questions.
11. Respondents were debriefed after they completed the first form and were then given the alter-
native version, asked to complete it, debriefed, and asked about any preference between the two.

Measurement Error in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples                          155
                                                                                   Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
Figure 4. Two Versions of Relationship Item Tested in Cognitive Interviews.
persons who were legally married chose “husband/wife/spouse,” “opposite-
sex husband/wife/spouse,” or “same-sex husband/wife/spouse,” and that per-
sons not legally married (whether in a registered domestic partnership/civil
union or without any legal recognition) tended to select “unmarried partner,”
“opposite-sex unmarried partner,” or “same-sex unmarried partner.”
   Five of the forty respondents reported a relationship that did not align with
their legal relationship status. All five were respondents from gay couples—
three had no legal status, and two were in a registered domestic partnership/
civil union—and all five reported as “same-sex husband/wife/spouse.” The
sequence of the response categories appears responsible for three reports—
respondents did not read far enough down the list. At the second category,
respondents saw “same-sex” in the “same-sex husband/wife/spouse” category,
chose it, and moved to the next item. During the debriefing, they acknowl-
edged that the fourth category—“same-sex unmarried partner”—might fit
better. The other two cases reflected perceptions of respondents in registered
domestic partnerships that their partners were more than “unmarried partners.”
   In summary, the results of the focus groups and cognitive interviews do
not suggest that unmarried same-sex couples have widely adopted the terms

156                                                     DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
Table 4. Legal Relationship Status of Respondents in Cognitive
Interviews by Answers to Relationship Question
                                                                  Relationship
                                                   Husband/      Unmarried
“True” legal statusa                                wifeb         partnerc      Other    Total
Gay married                                           10              0           0        10
                                                                                                   Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
Straight married                                       9              0           0         9
Gay domestic partnership or civil union                2              5           0         7
Straight domestic partnership or civil union           0              2           0         2
Gay no legal status                                    3              5           0         8
Straight no legal status                               0              4           0         4
N = 40                                                24             16           0        40
   a
    This status was determined by responses to the screener questionnaire when participants were
recruited.
   b
     Includes: husband/wife/spouse, opposite-sex husband/wife/spouse, same-sex husband/wife/
spouse.
   c
    Includes: opposite-sex unmarried partner, same-sex unmarried partner.
“husband/wife/spouse” to describe their partners on official forms. Since very
few unmarried couples reported “husband/wife/spouse,” we conclude that this
was not the main driver of the overreporting of same-sex married couples.
Discussion
In this paper, we examine an unusual case of measurement error involving
estimates of a very small population derived indirectly from two questions—
relationship and sex. Although a naïve observer might think the relation-
ship question would be the culprit because of its relative subjectivity in the
context of societal changes, our research suggests otherwise. The results of
rigorous quantitative analysis of 2010 Census data show that misreporting
in the sex item is the main culprit. In contrast, the qualitative data showed
that respondents interpreted the form to be requesting legal partnership sta-
tus. Consequently, it was rare for unmarried couples to choose “husband/wife/
spouse” to classify their intimate-partner relationship.
   The measurement issues identified in this paper have important implications.
First, since 28 percent of reported same-sex couples were probably opposite-
sex couples, the Census Bureau issued a set of 2010 Census “preferred” state-
level estimates of same-sex couples (U.S. Census Bureau 2011). The number
of same-sex couple households dropped from 901,997 to 646,464, and the
number of same-sex married households dropped from 349,377 to 131,729.
For analyses at the national and state levels for 2010, we recommend that

Measurement Error in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples                                           157
researchers use these preferred estimates. For changes between Census 2000
and 2010, researchers may use the estimates found in O’Connell and Feliz
(2011). There is no plan to retabulate preferred estimates for sub-state geogra-
phies; however, research external to the Census Bureau proposes adjustments
for analyzing lower geography estimates and presents comparative analyses
using the original versus preferred numbers (Williams Institute 2011; Poston,
Chang, and Deng 2012). Additionally, the 2010 Census Public Use Microdata
Sample (PUMS) will be a 10-percent sample and will contain a variable indi-
                                                                                                     Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
cating if a same-sex partner household was originally reported as a spouse
(and subsequently reclassified as an unmarried partner).
   Second, the problems identified here involved the layout of the paper NRFU
form. One way to avoid these problems is to avoid using a matrix format,
which is visually complicated with no clear navigational path for respondents.
A final questionnaire design consideration is the ordering of the new relation-
ship categories. We found instances where unmarried same-sex couples did
not read far enough down the list and misreported. Consequently, we recom-
mend changing the order of the categories to first list both opposite-sex cat-
egories and then list both same-sex categories.
   Another recommendation is to create edits or probes to double-check for
rare occurrences. The same-sex and opposite-sex response categories tested in
cognitive interviews do this by collecting the sex of the intimate partner in two
places. Further testing of this new option is warranted, but we are optimistic
that a different format could reduce the overreporting errors observed in the
2010 Census.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are freely available online at http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/.
References
Ashenfelter, Kathleen. 2012. “Differential Strategies and Reading Patterns for Demographic
  Surveys: Question Organization and Its Impact on Response Strategy.” In Cognitive Processes
  in Language, edited by K. Kosecki and J. Badio, 13–27. Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang.
Badgett, M. V. Lee, and Jody L. Herman. 2011. “Patterns of Relationship Recognition by Same-
  Sex Couples in the United States.” Williams Institute report, available at http://williamsinsti-
  tute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Marriage-Dissolution-FINAL.pdf.
Black, Dan, Gary J. Gates, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. 2007. “The Measurement Error
  of Same-Sex Unmarried Partner Couples in the U.S. Census.” California Center for Population
  Research.
Gates, Gary J., and Michael D.  Steinberger. 2009. “Same-Sex Unmarried Partner Couples in
  the ACS: The Role of Misreporting, Miscoding, and Misallocation.” Paper presented at the
  Population Association of America Meeting, Detroit.
Hull, Kathleen E. 2006. Same-Sex Marriage: The Cultural Politics of Love and Law. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.

158                                                     DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell
O’Connell, Martin, and Sarah  Feliz. 2011. “Same-Sex Couple Household Statistics from the
  2010 Census.” Social and Economic Household Statistics Division Working Paper, 2011–26.
  Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
O’Connell, Martin, and Gretchen Gooding. 2006. “The Use of First Names to Evaluate Reports
  of Gender and Its Effect on the Distribution of Married and Unmarried Couple Households.”
  Paper presented at the Population Association of America Meeting, Los Angeles.
Poston, Dudley L., Yu-Ting Chang, and Danielle Deng. 2012. “Patterns of Gay Male and Lesbian
  Partnering in the States and Metropolitan Areas of the United States in 2010.” Paper presented
  at the Population Association of America Meeting, San Francisco.
                                                                                                   Downloaded from http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/ at Exec. Ofc. of the President Library on March 13, 2016
U.S. Census Bureau. 2000. 2000 Census of Population and Housing—Notes and Errata. U.S.
  Government Printing Office. http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2000/notes/errata.pdf.
———. 2008. “Effects of Using a Grid versus a Sequential Form on the ACS Basic Demographic
  Data: Final Report.”
———. 2011. “Census Bureau Releases Estimates of Same-Sex Married Couples.” Press release,
  September 27. http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/2010_census/cb11-cn181.
  html.
Williams Institute. 2011. “Census Snapshot: 2010 Methodology Adjustment Procedures for Same-
  Sex Couple Data.” Available at http://wiwp.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Census2010-
  Snapshot-Adjustment-Procedures.pdf.

