	  
                            Gender Identity and Diversity
                                   Revision and updates
                                        August 2014
                                       Shelley Correll
                                      Cecilia Ridgeway
                                      Aliya Saperstein*
                                      Laurel Westbrook
*Corresponding author. Contact: asaper@stanford.edu
	  

	  
Executive Summary
Our pre-test on Amazon Mechanical Turk in May was a success. Counter to some of the Board’s
stated concerns, nonresponse was negligible and very few people left feedback suggesting that
they were offended or otherwise reacted negatively to the questions. The handful of negative
comments were offset by respondents thanking us for providing more than the usual answer
options or otherwise expressing support for the question design. Although a few people noted
that they found the masculine and feminine scales difficult to answer, two hundred volunteered
explanations of why they responded the way they did, and many seemed to enjoy the opportunity
to think about or describe their gender in a new way. One percent of respondents selected a sex
at birth and/or current gender that would not be captured using a standard static, binary, single-
measure method, and just 15 percent responded to the masculine and feminine scales in a way
that suggests the categories are diametrically opposed. Overall, we believe the pre-test provides
strong evidence that including the full module, with non-binary answer options, not only would
be feasible as part of the 2016 General Social Survey but also would provide important insights
on the range of gendered experience among U.S. adults.
That said, the Board requested we prioritize among the items to clearly identify the four most
important questions. Based on our pre-test results, and considering what would best complement
existing measures in the GSS, we rank the items in the following order of priority:
         1.  First order masculine and feminine scales (How do you see yourself?)
         2.  Sex assigned at birth
         3.  Gender identity
         4.  Third order masculine and feminine scales (How do you think most people see you?)
We provide our justification for this ranking, and details on how each of the items performed
during our pre-test, below. Our specific recommendations for the question wording and answer
options appear, in priority order, in Appendix 1 – just as they would appear on a computer
screen. We also note that we have a second pre-test planned for later this Fall, in which we plan
to include our full module along with more than two dozen questions from the GSS core. This
pilot study will demonstrate whether inclusion of the new gender identity and diversity items has
any effect on either subsequent questions or overall survey response, and provide a first look at
whether the previously unmeasured variation revealed by our module sheds new light on gender
inequality or other attitudes and behaviors of interest to GSS researchers.
We welcome any recommendations the Board might have for which GSS items should be
included on our next pilot study, as well as any other suggestions for split ballots or other
variations in survey conditions that would further enhance our proposal and improve the chances
that our items will be selected for the 2016 survey. (See Appendix 2 for a brief description of our
planned study design and a list of the GSS items we are considering for the second pre-test.)
The pre-test
As outlined in our initial proposal, we fielded a seven-question survey on Mturk in order to
assess respondents’ willingness to answer detailed questions about their sex at birth, current
                                                                                                 1	  
	  

	  
gender identity, how they perceived their masculinity and femininity, and how respondents
thought others perceived them. We also tested variations in answer options, answer order and
question order, and asked respondents to give us feedback on the questions they had answered.
Respondents were offered 25 cents for their participation, and were only allowed to take the
survey once. They were also required to be 18 years or older, U.S. residents and have an Mturk
Human Intelligence Task (HIT) approval rating of at least 80 percent.
Our goal was to recruit 1,600 respondents, randomly assigned to each of our four major
conditions: 1. binary answer options and conventional answer order (male, female/man,
woman/masculine, feminine); 2. binary answer options and unconventional answer order
(female, male/woman, man/feminine, masculine); 3. non-binary answer options and conventional
answer order (male, female, intersex/man, woman, transgender, other/masculine, feminine); and
4. non-binary answer options with an unconventional answer order (female, intersex,
male/woman, transgender, man, other/feminine, masculine). To speed up data collection, we
reposted the HIT several times over the course of a three-week period, most often in the early
morning. This resulted in responses arriving in batches that we flagged with unique indicators.
All findings were checked for variation by batch. No significant differences were found. The
final sample of 1,521 excludes all duplicate IP addresses and Mturk IDs, 40 respondents whose
IP addresses indicated they submitted the survey from outside the U.S., and 12 respondents who
completed the survey in less than 25 seconds. See Table 1 for basic descriptive statistics by
survey condition, including average completion time and the regional distribution of responses
(assigned based on the respondent’s IP addresses). Two cases in our analytic sample are missing
on region, one is missing on the first order scales and one is missing on sex at birth, but not the
other measures.
Thirty-five percent of respondents (530) left some form of feedback in response to the final
question on our survey. Twelve percent (183) simply responded with “none,” “n/a” or something
similar to indicate they had no questions or concerns. One way to interpret this result is that the
vast majority of respondents did not perceive the survey itself or the non-binary answer options
and unconventional answer order as unusual, confusing, or otherwise worthy of comment. The
amount of feedback received did vary somewhat across conditions, with respondents in the non-
binary answer option and unconventional answer order condition leaving the fewest comments,
while respondents in the non-binary answer option and conventional answer order condition left
the most (see Table 1). Explicit expressions of support for the survey were most common in the
binary and conventional condition and decreased somewhat as the survey became more
unconventional, while the few explicit expressions of discomfort or other negative reactions to
the survey were relatively equally distributed. Indeed, it would seem that the negative responses
we did receive were prompted more by the implication from the series of questions that one’s sex
and gender might differ at all than by the specific ways respondents were offered to express any
such differences. None of the substantive feedback suggested that respondents felt threatened by
the scale items inquiring about their levels of masculinity and femininity. (For examples of
feedback received, see Appendix 3.) However, we did find significant differences in average
responses to the masculine and feminine scales depending on whether respondents answered
those items first or last. We discuss these results, and their implications, in more detail below.
                                                                                                  2	  
	  

	  
Measuring masculinity and femininity
The masculine and feminine scales were presented with seven response categories, ranging from
“not at all” to “extremely.” Only the poles of the scales were given nominal labels, other options
were marked with numbers. (We did not give nominal labels to all points to avoid possible
negative connotations, such as describing oneself as “somewhat” masculine.) All respondents
rated themselves on both masculine and feminine scales, from both the third-order (How do you
think most people see you?) and first-order (How do you see yourself?) perspectives, for a total
of four scale ratings per respondent. The scales were presented with the third-order item first,
followed by the first-order item.
Average responses did not differ significantly between the first and third order scales (see Table
1). This suggests that the vast majority of respondents experience little dissonance between how
they think other people perceive them and how they see themselves – or that they see little
distinction between the two perspectives. We do plan to include both sets of scales in our second
pre-test, this time counterbalancing their question order (between self and other perception) to
see if that encourages greater differentiation on the two sets of scales. Otherwise, it would seem
that asking only one perspective or the other will suffice to allow most people to express their
current levels of masculinity and femininity. If only one set of scales were to be used, we
recommend asking the first-order question (How do you see yourself?) because it provides the
clearest counterpoint to the interviewer’s classification of the respondent’s sex/gender that
occurs at the beginning of the GSS.
Respondents did make use of the full range of responses on the seven-point scales. Although few
respondents selected the “not at all” response on the scale consistent with their sex or gender,
they did not appear to avoid the “extremely” sex/gender typical points of the scales (see Table 2).
The majority of males responded using 1 to 3 on the feminine scale (86 percent) and 5 to 7 on the
masculine scale (87 percent), and vice versa for females. Despite this clear clustering, 15-24
percent of respondents chose responses either in the middle or at the opposite end of the
spectrum consistent with their sex category (the frequency varied somewhat by sex and scale). In
our second pre-test, we plan to substitute “very” at the high end of the scale instead of
“extremely” (which might have a negative connotation for some respondents) to determine
whether it provides similar results. For now, we continue to recommend a seven-point scale
because of the distribution of responses on our first pre-test. Doing so offers more nuanced
information about respondents’ masculinity and femininity but does not preclude researchers
from collapsing categories if that best fits their research design.
We also affirm the importance of maintaining the masculine and feminine scales as separate
items, rather than combining them into a single scale with “extremely” (or “very”) masculine at
one pole and “extremely” (or “very”) feminine at the other. Fifteen percent of respondents
selected the sex-category-consistent poles on both scales, 20 percent selected an extreme sex-
consistent response on one scale or the other but not both, while approximately two-thirds of
respondents chose non-extreme responses on both scales (not shown). Females also reported
higher levels of masculinity, on average, than males reported for femininity, a result that would
be hidden on a single bipolar scale. Further, by gauging masculinity and femininity separately,
researchers have the flexibility to include either or both measures as variables in their analysis. It
                                                                                                  3	  
	  

	  
is also possible to calculate a “polarization” score from the two scale responses that allows the
extent of separation between one’s masculinity and femininity to become an empirical question.
Comparing average gender polarization scores over time and across contexts could open
intriguing new lines of research about trends in gender expression.
Other results of interest from our pre-test include finding significant variation in responses to the
scales by region and by when the scales appeared in the survey (see Table 3). Gender
polarization was the lowest in the West and highest in the South for both males and females.
Polarization increased by 0.27 points when the scales appeared third compared to when they
appeared first in the survey. (This difference was statistically significant controlling for region,
sex at birth, survey condition and batch.) Although males gave more polarized responses overall,
females were most likely to give extreme sex-consistent responses to both scales when the scales
appeared third, following the sex at birth and current gender items. Extremely polarized
responses (i.e., polarization scores of 6) were also more common in general in the Midwest and
the South, statistically significantly so for females (not shown).
We interpret the variation in scale responses by question order to suggest that respondents
reacted to seeing questions about their sex at birth and current gender by asserting more extreme,
sex-category-consistent responses on the masculine and feminine scales. When the scale items
appeared first (rather than second or third), respondents on average selected less extreme
responses. It is possible that the scale items would be sensitive to other question order effects, as
well, and thus we recommend that they do not follow directly after items assessing gendered
beliefs or stereotypical behaviors (e.g., who does the housework).
A note on the third order scales. Although comparing average scores on the masculine and
feminine scales between first-order and third order perspectives yielded no significant
differences, the two sets of scales did not entirely replicate one another (see Table 4). Twenty-
two percent of respondents gave distinct first- and third-order responses on both masculine and
feminine scales, while 35 percent differed on one scale or the other; however, the vast majority
of respondents differed by only one point. A lack of concordance between the scales was
particularly noticeable for categorically gender variant respondents (not shown), and we expect
that examining when first and third order perspectives diverge could open up interesting lines of
research. We plan to further test and refine both sets of scales in our second pre-test and hope to
have more encouraging results to report regarding the contribution of the third order scale in time
for the Spring 2015 meeting, if the Board is still considering our proposal at that time.
Capturing categorical gender variance
In addition to the range of gender expression revealed by the scale items, one percent of our
sample (15 respondents) could be described as categorically gender variant based on their
responses to the item asking for their current gender and/or the sex they were assigned at birth
(see Table 5). These respondents either selected gender identities outside the traditional
man/woman binary, or gave a sex at birth and current binary gender identity that differed,
suggesting they had transitioned from male at birth to woman (i.e., a trans woman) or female at
birth to man (a trans man). None of our respondents identified as intersex, which might reflect
not only their small numbers in the population but the lack of consensus on how to best identify
                                                                                                   4	  
	  

	  
them in population surveys (see GenIUSS forthcoming). Of the four respondents who selected
the alternative “a gender not listed here” response for their current identity, two specified
“genderqueer,” one wrote in “androgynous” and one did not specify. However, it is important to
note that our results likely underestimate the number of people who would have offered non-
binary gender responses because only half of the respondents in our pretest could explicitly
identify as a gender other than “man” or “woman” (i.e., those who were assigned to one of the
two non-binary conditions). Indeed, three respondents assigned to binary answer option
conditions reported different categories for their sex at birth and their current gender, providing
an indirect measure of their transgender status.
A frequency of transgender respondents between 0.3 and 0.7 percent (using either direct or
indirect measurement) is in line with estimates based on samples in Massachusetts and California
(Gates 2011). Should the GSS implement our recommended two-step approach of asking sex at
birth and current gender identity, using non-binary answer options, we estimate that as many as
45 respondents will identify (or be identifiable) as categorically gender variant. Other methods
and smaller GSS sample sizes will result in fewer gender variant cases (see Table 6). Pooling
across years likely would be necessary for detailed multivariate or sub-group analysis of gender
variant populations (e.g., comparing trans men to trans women), but that is the case for many
other studies of interest with GSS data, including comparing outcomes across the youngest and
oldest birth cohorts.
Although the GSS currently includes a measure of the respondent’s sex/gender that is recorded
by the interviewer at the beginning of the survey (the variable SEX), we stress the importance of
using the additional two-step method as part of the self-administered questionnaire for several
reasons. At the moment, the interviewers’ appraisal of respondents captures some combination of
their observation of the respondents’ physical appearance with other cues such as the
respondents’ names and relationships to other members of their household. Interviewers are
advised during training to ask respondents when they are unsure, but they are not explicitly
required or given a script to do so (unlike they were, e.g., in the pre-2000 GSS race question).
Thus, most of the time, the SEX variable will capture the sex/gender the respondent is currently
presenting, and perhaps presents on a regular basis. It is not clear what the interviewer’s
classification would capture for respondents in the midst of transition or who otherwise do not
conform to gender norms (e.g., our respondents who wrote in alternative gender identities). The
two-step approach is also the only way to identify Americans who have transitioned but prefer to
identify with a traditional gender category. Four categorically gender variant respondents (three
trans men and a trans woman) identified this way, despite being assigned to a non-binary
condition and thus having the option to explicitly identify as transgender.
If adding the two-step approach is not possible due to funding or space constraints, we have a
slight preference for including the question regarding the respondent’s sex at birth over the
respondent’s current gender. We make this recommendation with reservations related to the
tradeoffs between the information in the two items. However, we assume that the respondent’s
sex at birth is information the GSS interviewer would be less likely to know simply from the
household enumeration form and early interactions with the respondent (e.g., if he or she had
transitioned). It is also the closest proxy to the respondent’s biological sex, which is what many
researchers think they are using when including the current SEX variable in their analyses.
                                                                                                  5	  
	  

	  
Further, if the interviewer’s classification of the respondent more closely approximates a binary
measure of the respondent’s current gender, then it would still be possible to compare the
interviewer’s classification with the respondent’s reported sex at birth to indirectly identify some
transgender respondents. That said, not all respondents who consider themselves “transgender”
will be captured by this comparison. (See Schilt and Bratter forthcoming for a discussion of the
range of possible transgender responses.)
We expect our second pre-test will offer additional evidence that including the entire gender
identity and diversity module does not compromise overall survey response, and we believe that
knowing each facet, not alone but in combination, provides important context for understanding
Americans’ experiences with sex and gender inequality. The masculine and feminine scales are
an improvement over the existing SEX variable because they allow for a spectrum of gender
expression, but they still require responses relative to the traditional sex/gender binary. Sex at
birth, in combination with the current interviewer classification, will capture some changes over
time in respondents’ identities, but only asking respondents about their current gender, including
at least one option beyond “man” and “woman,” truly allows Americans to identify beyond the
traditional binary if they so choose. It is not clear if a growing number of Americans are
identifying their gender in more complex ways (Chalabi 2014), or if survey researchers simply
have not been asking the right questions all along. Either way, it is important to capture this trend
and track its impact on other domains in people’s lives. In doing so, the GSS would be at the
forefront of efforts to better understand gender identity and diversity in the United States.
References
Chalabi, Mona 2014. “Why We Don’t Know the Size of the Transgender Population.” Five Thirty Eight
     Life, July 29. http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-we-dont-know-the-size-of-the-transgender-
     population/
Gates, Gary J. 2011. “How Many People Are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender?” Los Angeles,
     CA: The Williams Institute. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/09h684x2
GenIUSS. Forthcoming. “Best Practices for Asking Questions to Identify Transgender and Other Gender
Minority Respondents on Population-Based Surveys.” Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute.
Schilt, Kristen and Jenifer Bratter. Forthcoming. “From Multiracial to Multigender? Assessing Attitudes
toward a Transgender Category on the U.S. Census.” Transgender Studies Quarterly.
                                                                                                      6	  
	  

    	  
Table 1. Sample descriptives, Gender Identity and Diversity Pre-test on Amazon Mechanical Turk
                                                                        Condition
                                          Binary,           Binary,              Non-binary,       Non-binary,
                                          conventional      unconventional       conventional      unconventional       Total
Sex at birth
                               Male                  63%                 64%                58%                  63%          62%
                            Female                   37%                 36%                42%                  37%          38%
                           Intersex                      -                    -              0%                   0%           0%
Gender identity
                               Man                   63%                 64%                57%                  63%          62%
                           Woman                     37%                 36%                41%                  36%          37%
                              Trans                      -                    -            0.8%                 0.3%         0.5%
         Another gender (specify)                        -                    -            0.5%                 0.5%         0.5%
First order masculine scale                (mean)      3.6                 3.4                3.2                  3.5         3.4
Third order masculine scale                            3.5                 3.4                3.2                  3.4         3.4
First order feminine scale                             2.3                 2.4                2.6                  2.4         2.4
Third order feminine scale                             2.4                 2.4                2.6                  2.5         2.5
First order polarization                               3.4                 3.5                3.4                  3.4         3.4
Third order polarization                               3.4                 3.5                3.5                  3.5         3.5
Left any feedback                                    35%                 35%                40%                  29%          35%
          Explanation of response                    15%                 13%                14%                  11%          13%
                 Generic gratitude                    3%                  6%                 6%                   4%           5%
                   Explicit support                   3%                  2%                 1%                 0.8%           2%
                       Discomfort                     1%                0.5%               0.8%                   1%         0.9%
Region
                               West                  25%                 25%                21%                  24%          24%
                          Midwest                    21%                 23%                23%                  19%          21%
                         Northeast                   21%                 18%                22%                  21%          21%
                              South                  33%                 34%                34%                  35%          34%
Total survey duration (secs)                            80                  80                 84                   77          80
N                                                     383                 382                378                  378        1521
% of sample                                        25.2%               25.1%             24.9%                24.9%       100.0%
Note: Sample includes cases with U.S. IP addresses, unique IP addresses or Mturk IDs, and completed surveys with
durations greater than 24 seconds. The distribution of the sample by sex (or gender) does not mirror the U.S. population, but
is in line with the known skew among Mturk workers (e.g., Richey and Taylor 2012 http://themonkeycage.org/2012/12/19/how-
representative-are-amazon-mechanical-turk-workers/; though see Berensky et al. 2011). The total percentage presented for non-
binary genders reflects the percentage among respondents who were offered non-binary gender responses, which was one-
half of our total sample. Masculine and feminine scales were recoded from 0 to 6 and averaged; scale polarization is the
absolute value difference between the masculine and feminine response categories selected by the respondent. Region is
derived from IP address, coded using detailed GSS categories, then collapsed.
                                                                                                                       7	  
    	  

	  
     Table 2. Distribution of first-order masculinity and femininity scale scores by reported sex at birth
                                                                                                          Proportions
                                                  Standard
                                       Mean       deviation      Not at all        1          2        3         4          5      Extremely
     Male at birth
               Masculine scale            4.6             1.1            1%        1%         2%       8%       28%       39%            20%
                 Feminine scale           1.2             1.2          34%       33%        17%        9%        5%         1%          0.2%
                   Polarization           3.5             1.7            7%        8%       14%       16%       25%       16%            16%
     Female at birth
                 Feminine scale           4.4             1.3            1%        2%         5%      12%       30%       30%            21%
               Masculine scale            1.5             1.4          32%       24%        20%       13%        8%         2%             1%
                   Polarization           3.2             1.9          10%       13%        17%       13%       18%       14%            16%
     Note: N=1,519; 944 males and 575 females. Scales were recoded from 0-6. Polarization is the absolute value of the difference between the
     two scales.
	  

	  
     Table 3. Polarization scores by region and scales order
                                        Males                Females
     Region
     West                                      3.3                      2.8
     Midwest                                   3.6                      3.2
     Northeast                                 3.6                      3.0
     South                                     3.7                      3.6
     Total                                     3.5                      3.2
     Scales order
     First                                     3.4                      3.1
     Second                                    3.5                      3.1
     Third                                     3.6                      3.4
     Total                                     3.5                      3.2
     Note: Two-tailed tests indicate that polarization scores for males are
     significantly higher than for females overall, and in each region, except the
     South. Polarization scores are also significantly higher in the South
     compared to the West for both males and females. Differences in
     polarization by scales order are not statistically significant on average, but
     the difference between when the scales were presented first compared to
     third is statistically significant in an OLS regression controlling for sex at
     birth, condition, region and batch.
	  
	  

	  
     Table 4. Divergence between sex-category consistent first and third order scales
     Male at birth
                                          First order masculine scale
     Third order             Not at all   1       2       3      4      5 Extremely   Total N
                  Not at all      0       0       0       0      0      0       0             0
                          1       4       0       1       1      0      0       0             6
                          2       0       6       0      13      3      0       0            22
                          3       2       0       7       0     26      4       0            39
                          4       1       0       5      23      0     76       5           110
                          5       1       0       1       8     83      0      51           144
                 Extremely        1       0       0       1      5     17       0            24
     Total N                      9       6      14      46    117     97      56           345
     Female at birth
                                           First order feminine scale
     Third order             Not at all  1        2       3       4     5 Extremely   Total N
                  Not at all     0       0        0       0       0     0        0            0
                          1      2       0        5       0       0     0        0            7
                          2      2       3        0       2       2     0        0            9
                          3      3       0        5       0      11     2        0           21
                          4      0       0        7      33       0    41        3           84
                          5      0       0        3       4      60     0       23           90
                 Extremely       0       0        0       1       4    16        0           21
     Total N                     7       3       20      40      77    59       26          232
	  

	  
     Table 5. Cross-tabulation of reported sex assigned at birth and current gender
                                        Self-identified gender
                                                                    Another gender
                        Man      Woman           Transgender                 (specify)   Total
     Sex
     assigned
     at birth
     Male              938          2                 3                      2            945
                      99.3%         0.2%                  0.3%                   0.2%   100.0%
     Female             5          567                1                      2            575
                       0.9%        98.6%                  0.2%                   0.4%   100.0%
     Intersex           0           0                 0                      0             0
     Total             943         569                4                      4           1,520
                      62.0%        37.4%                  0.3%                   0.3%   100.0%
     Note: Row percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding. Only half of the sample (756
     respondents) was offered non-binary gender response options. Total N does not include one
     self-identified man who said he accidentally skipped the sex at birth question.
	  
	  

	  
     Table 6. Estimates of categorical gender variance by measurement approach for full GSS sample
                                                             Percent of                          Estimated N
                                                               sample       Sample=2000 Sample=2800 Sample=4500
     Measurement approach
      Current GSS interviewer classification                      0%                        0                  0                    0
        One-step, gender identity, non-binary                    0.6%                      12                17                    27
           One-step, sex at birth (compared to
                     interviewer classification)             unknown              unknown            unknown              unknown
                               Two-step, binary                  0.5%                      10                14                    23
                          Two-step, non-binary                   1.0%                      20                28                    45
     Note: Percentages draw on results from the Mturk pre-test. Estimated Ns represent a range of sample sizes available in recent
     GSS surveys. Two-step binary approach only identifies transgender respondents indirectly, by comparing sex at birth with
     current gender.
	  

!
Appendix 1: Recommended items
Our recommendations include an answer order that presents the responses in order of population
size. The population size response ordering is something of a compromise between the
conventional and unconventional response orders in our pre-test – neither of which drew any
comment (positive or negative) in the feedback from our pre-test respondents. Each item appears
on its own page.
Please note that we are not recommending that the first-order and third-order scales be presented
at opposite ends of the module, as appears below. We are simply illustrating our priority ranking
for the items here. However, we do recommend that if either or both sets of scales are included
the scales should be presented to respondents before the sex at birth and gender identity items to
avoid what appeared to be gender “overcompensation” in scale responses (cf. Willer et al. 2013).
First-order scales:
Sex at birth:
                                                                                                  13!
!

	  
Gender identity:
Third-order scales:
                    14	  
	  

	  
Appendix 2: The second pre-test
In late October we plan to recruit another 1,600 Mturk respondents to complete a 20-minute
survey drawn from actual items employed by the General Social Survey. These include measures
of socioeconomic status, health and well-being, as well as attitudes and behaviors that we expect
are likely to vary along the different dimensions of sex and gender we are proposing for the 2016
survey round. The items will appear in a similar order as they appear in the actual GSS
questionnaire and with the same question wording and answer options. Our goal is to mimic the
original GSS as closely as possible – excepting the addition of our module.
This time, our survey conditions will allow for three key comparisons: 1) whether the sex and
gender items appear at the beginning of the questions borrowed from the GSS self-administered
questionnaire (SAQ) or at the end of the survey; 2) whether the third-order scale appears first or
the first-order scale does; and 3) whether the scales both appear before the sex at birth and
current gender items, or after them. The latter comparison is a necessary carry-over from our first
pre-test because we plan to change the high-end scale response labels to “very,” and we do not
want to attribute changes in results to the new nominal label that actually reflect the question
ordering or vice versa. By testing the placement of the gender identity and diversity module
relative to other items in the survey, we do not mean to imply that we recommend the module be
included at the end of the SAQ. In fact, we believe the end of the SAQ would not be a good
place for the new items because they would follow questions on sex practices and sexual
orientation, which is likely to affect responses, especially to the scale items. However, we want
to include a small sample that answered all previous questions on the survey before seeing our
proposed module in order to determine whether or not seeing the module earlier in the
questionnaire is likely to affect responses on later items. Our expected sample sizes, by
condition, appear below:
                                     First-order scale first       Third-order scale first
Module starts SAQ portion
N= 1200
       Both scales first                      300                            300
       Both scales last                       300                            300
Module ends survey
N = 400
       Both scales first                      100                            100
       Both scales last                       100                            100
The list that follows specifies the items from the GSS that we plan to include, in the order the
questions will be asked. We specifically included items on employment status, economic
hardships, health, and experiences of violence because previous research indicates that
transgender Americans are particularly likely to be unemployed, marginally housed, subject to
violence and lacking access to appropriate health care (see, e.g., GenIUSS forthcoming).
We also changed the format of some items, including the NAT- series that opens the survey (and
the GSS), to make them more efficient in our fully self-administered Internet mode.
                                                                                                  15	  
	  

	  
(NATENVIY, NATCRIMY, NATEDUCY, NATARMSY, NATFAREY & NATSCI modified)
      We are faced with many problems in this country, none of which can be solved easily or
inexpensively. Some of these problems are listed below. For each one, please indicate whether you think
we are spending too much money on it, too little money, or about the right amount.
                                                    Spending too       Spending       Spending the right
                                                    much               too little     amount
The environment                                         ☐                  ☐             ☐
Law enforcement                                         ☐                  ☐             ☐
Education                                               ☐                  ☐             ☐
National defense                                        ☐                  ☐             ☐
Scientific research                                     ☐                  ☐             ☐
Assistance for the poor                                 ☐                  ☐             ☐
(DISCAFFM)
      What do you think the chances are these days that a man won’t get a job or promotion while an
equally or less qualified woman gets one instead. Is this very likely, somewhat likely, somewhat unlikely,
or very unlikely these days?
(POSSLQY, substitutes “spouse” for husband and wife)
     Which of these statements applies to you?
           I am married and living in the same household as my spouse
           I have a steady partner and we live in the same household
           I have a spouse or steady partner, but we don’t live in the same household
           I don’t have a steady partner
(WRKSTAT, check all that apply; will recode according to GSS instructions after the fact)
     Last week, were you working full time, part time, going to school, keeping house, or what?
(WEEKWRK)
      How about last year? In 2013, how many weeks did you work either full-time or part-time?
(FEAR, modified)
      Is there any area around your home–that is, within a mile–where you would be afraid to walk alone?
(FEARHOME, modified)
     How about at home – do you feel safe and secure, or not?
(LAW2, modified)
     In the past 12 months, were you beaten up, hit, or attacked with a weapon?
(CLASS)
     If you were asked to use one of four names for your social class, which would you say you belong in:
the lower class, the working class, the middle class, or the upper class?
(FINALTER)
     During the last few years, has your financial situation been getting better, getting worse, or has it
stayed the same?
                                                                                                           16	  
	  

	  
(HISP1 & 2)
     Are you Spanish, Hispanic or Latino?
         (if yes, Which group are you from?)
(RACECEN)
     What is your race? Indicate one or more races that you consider yourself to be.
(DISCAFF)
     What do you think the chances are these days that a white person won’t get a job or promotion while
an equally or less qualified black person gets one instead? Is this very likely, somewhat likely, or not very
likely to happen these days?
(MARHOMO)
     Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: Homosexual couples have the right to marry
one another.
(HAPPY)
     Taking things all together, how would you say things are these days—would you say that you are
very happy, pretty happy, or not too happy?
(HEALTH)
     Would you say your own health, in general, is excellent, very good, good, fair or poor?
(MNTLHLTH2)
     Now thinking about your mental health, which includes stress, depression, and problems with
emotions, for how many days during the past 30 days was your mental health not good?
(PRTYPREF)
     Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself as a Republican, Democrat, Independent, or
what?
(POLVIEWS)
     There is a lot of talk these days about liberals and conservatives. Below is a seven-point scale on
which the political views that people might hold are arranged from extremely liberal to extremely
conservative. Where would you place yourself on this scale?
(BORN)
     Were you born in this country?
(PARBORN)
     Were both of your parents born in this country?
(GRANBORN)
     Were all of your grandparents born in this country?
(RGRADE)
     What is the highest grade in elementary school or high school that you finished and got credit for?
(List from “no formal schooling” to 12th grade)
(RDIPLOMA)
     Did you ever get a high school diploma or a GED certificate?
                                                                                                            17	  
	  

	  
(RCOLDEG)
     Do you have any college degrees? (if yes, What was the highest degree you earned?)
(ERNRS)
     How many persons in your family – those people in your household who are related to you – earned
any money last year – 2013 – from any job or employment (including yourself)?
(INCOME06, with categories A-Y)
     In which of these groups did your total family income, from all sources, fall last year – 2013 – before
taxes? (Total income includes interest or dividends, rent, Social Security other pensions, alimony or child
support, unemployment compensation, public aid (welfare), armed forces or veteran’s allotment.)
(DWELOWN)
     Do you (or does your family) own your home, pay rent, or what?
(BIRTHYR, modified to comply with Mturk terms of service)
     What year were you born?
[Scales and sex/gender self-identifications will most often be included here]
(ARREST2)
     Were you ever picked up or charged by the police, for any reason whether or not you were guilty?
(LOCKEDUP)
     Have you ever spent any time in prison or jail?
(RHHWORK)
     On average, how many hours a week do you personally spend on household work, not including
childcare and leisure time activities?
(ORGINC)
     (If R has spouse/partner) How do you and your (spouse/partner) organize the income that one or both
of you receive? Please choose the option that comes closest.
(HIGHINC)
     Considering all sources of income, between you and your (spouse/partner), who has the higher
income?
(CUTAHEAD, VOLCHRTY, GIVCHRTY, HELPAWAY, CARRIED, TALKEDTO)
     During the past 12 months, how often have you done each of the following things:
                          At least once a  At least once a    At least once in      Not at all in the
                          week             month              the past year         past year
Allowed a stranger to         ☐                ☐                  ☐                     ☐
go ahead of you in line
Done volunteer work           ☐                ☐                  ☐                     ☐
for a charity
Given money to a              ☐                ☐                  ☐                     ☐
                                                                                                           18	  
	  

	  
charity
Looked after a person’s         ☐               ☐                 ☐                   ☐
plants, mail or pets
while they were away
Carried a stranger's            ☐               ☐                 ☐                   ☐
belongings, like
groceries, a suitcase, or
shopping bag
Spent time talking with         ☐               ☐                 ☐                   ☐
someone who was a bit
down or depressed
(HRDSHP series, modified)
     During the past 12 months, did you find yourself in any of the following circumstances?
                                  Yes              No          Not applicable
Fell behind in paying                ☐              ☐                   ☐
your rent or mortgage
Unable to purchase                   ☐              ☐                   ☐
needed food
Unable to purchase                   ☐              ☐                   ☐
needed medical care
Had to temporarily live              ☐              ☐                   ☐
with others or in a
shelter or “on the street”
(PARTNERS)
     How many sex partners have you had in the last 12 months?
(SEXFREQ)
     About how often did you have sex during the past 12 months?
(SEXORNT)
     Which of the following best describes you?
          (Gay, lesbian or homosexual; bisexual; heterosexual or straight; don’t know)
(SEXSEX18)
     Since the age of 18, have your sex partners been:
          Only men
          Some women, but mostly men
          Equally men and women
          Some men, but mostly women
          Only women
          I have not had any sex partners
[In some conditions, the scales and sex/gender self-identification would appear here]
(VERADDR, modified)
     Please enter your current state and zip code.
Thank you very much for your time and help. That is all the questions we have for you.
                                                                                             19	  
	  

	  
Appendix 3: Assessing Feedback
After completing the six sex and gender items, respondents were asked a follow-up question
soliciting feedback on the survey. Just over a third of the sample took the time to type some
response, though many were one word answers such as “none,” “n/a” or simply “thanks!” It is
important to note that, for serious Mturk workers, taking the time to respond to our feedback
question would lower their pay rate relative to not answering. Thus, the responses we received
are likely not representative of everything respondents might have had to say in a controlled
cognitive interview setting. Nevertheless, they offer an important window into how American
adults are likely to react to being asked questions about their gender expression and identity.
We were particularly interested in three types of feedback: positive responses to the survey,
negative responses to the survey, and requests for clarification. These were the key distinctions
we made when coding the comments for content. However, a category we did not expect –
explanations for responses, especially on the scale items – may also be of interest to the Board
and is summarized below.
Twice as many female respondents left explicitly supportive feedback, while male respondents
dominated the discomfited responses. Four of the 15 categorically gender variant respondents
left feedback: two expressed explicit support for the survey and two offered explanations to
contextualize their responses. Respondents were more likely to leave comments, explanatory or
otherwise, if they responded to the scale items last – immediately before being asked for their
feedback. Respondents who gave more atypical, or less polarized, responses on the masculine
and feminine scales also were significantly more likely to take the time to explain why they did
so. (This result held net of sex at birth, region, survey condition and batch.)
Explicit support
Twenty respondents provided explicitly supportive feedback that communicated gratitude for
non-binary options, support of non-binary genders, or other interest in the content of the study.
Comments that were positive but vague were not included. For example, comments that said
“interesting” but did not explicitly refer to an aspect of the survey’s content left it unclear
whether “interesting” was meant as praise. Also not included in this group are the 54 comments
expressing generic support or gratitude (“neat survey!” “Thank you!”), or the 50 comments that
described the survey as “easy,” straightforward, or indicated the respondent had no concerns
about the questions. The explicitly supportive comments included:
     • Thank you for differentiating between sex assigned at birth, and gender identity.
     • This is the best survey ever--I get so sick of surveys asking which "gender" I am and then providing only two
       options, neither of which are my gender identity.
     • Adding a third option or something would really add to this -- plenty of people prefer identification that's a bit
       more complicated than male/female! (from respondent assigned to a binary condition)
     • Thanks for recognizing that not all women are female!
     • I think those questions do provide a sense of reflecting how a person feels about him or herself. I think many
       people today do feel different from how people see them. (male respondent)
     • It was interesting to see that you actually differentiated between sex and gender(how we describe ourselves)
       and I have never thought of how I percive my sex gender vs how others view me.
     • Liked the first one "what sex were you assigned at birth" nothing really (presumably meaning no questions or
       concerns)
                                                                                                                        20	  
	  

	  
     • Most men and woman have masculine and feminine qualities which I think is perfect.
     • I completely beleive people feel different than what their gender may be, probably due to different brain
       wiring. I am all for transgender, I just know that I myself, am in the correct body.
     • No concerns, I hope the purpose is to help the general population be more understanding/accepting of those
       who do not identify with the gender assigned to them at birth.
     • No concerns, I'd be curious to see the results!! We learned in my psychology class that gender is a spectrum
       and I'd be curious to see if these results supported that! (male respondent)
     • That was really brief! I guess it would be interesting to see a breakdown of feminine and masculine
       characteristics (maybe not identified as such) and see how that's related to how people view themselves on the
       spectrum of femininity and masculinity.
     • They were interesting questions about how we perceive ourselves
     • Thank you for allowing for the possibility of being neither masculine nor feminine instead of presenting the
       two options as a single sliding scale! I don't have a problem being female, but I don't feel any particular
       attachment to my gender, or to the concept of gender in general.
     • Although I am straight and have never had any gender issues, I feel like there is a femanine part of me that
       only I know about. That is why I answered the way people perceive me different than what I feel. Also I
       enjoyed participating in this study. (male respondent)
     • It is interesting that the survey asked questions to do with femininity and masculinity, but it differentiated
       between the sex given at birth vs. what and how we identify ourselves as adults. Very interesting.
     • I like that you ask our gender, most surveys just assume we are male or female and that's it. Seems like other
       surveys don't get the difference between sex and gender.
Discomfort or concern
Thirteen respondents left negative feedback about the content of the survey, broadly construed.
Twelve of these comments came from male respondents. Included in this group are respondents
who imply they did not have a problem with the survey, but suggest others might. All of these
comments are reproduced below:
     • I don't think the term "assigned at birth" is fair or accurate. Gender at birth is determined by anatomy, not by
       societal labels.
     • It is really a shame that such questions need to be asked about one's gender.
     • I don't have any questions. I think it was very simple to answer. I think some people might not be too happy
       with the question "What gender were you assigned at birth?" Especially extreme conservatives.
     • I find it sad that we are asking questions like this in today's society. I do not understand why people want to
       change their gender. This is so sad.
     • Interesting questions about whether I feel like a man or woman. I think this is a controversial topic because
       you have to identify as a male or female for most things.
     • I don't know what kind of feedback you want, but here is what I have to say. I was born a male, and I have
       always lived as a male. I know there are people out there who feel they are confused on their gender role, but I
       am not one of them. God has a plan for my life, and that is as a male.
     • I was not "assigned" a sex at birth. I'm a man. Science!
     • These kind of questions tend to make me feel uncomfortable.
     • These questions just make me sigh.
     • I am a man! What kind of questions are these?
     • Just seems like a normalish demographic survey considering the age we live in.
     • What the hell is going on in this world--what is my CURRENT sex? Too bizarre. What is going on with all
       this "gender" obsessiveness is unnatural and sick.Wake up. (female respondent)
     • Seems like natural questions to ask in the social justice climate of today.
                                                                                                                      21	  
	  

	  
Another two dozen respondents made comments indicating they thought some or all of the
survey was “odd,” “weird” or “strange.” Some of these respondents may have meant their
comments as a critique; some also seemed to be expressing surprise or curiosity about the goal of
the study. Unlike the previous two feedback categories, male and female respondents were
represented in this group in proportion to their distribution in the survey as a whole.
Nevertheless, including these comments with the more clearly concerned respondents provides a
generous estimate of those bothered by the survey at 2.5 percent of our sample. This broader
group includes comments such as:
• The "what is your current gender" question threw me. I wonder how many transsexuals you get taking these
     surveys.
•    Really weird survey, quick and easy though
•    All little odd but no real questions
•    Would love to know what on earth this is about
•    Strange survey, but interesting
•    I think they are odd questions.
•    They were very simple questions and easy to understand. I don't really have any feedback. I was kind of
     surprised by the questions to be honest. I did not expect to be asked that, but I am not offended or anything. It's
     just not something I normally give much thought to.
We should also note that one respondent, assigned to the binary/unconventional condition,
appeared to click through the entire survey but did not answer any questions. One man assigned
to the non-binary/conventional condition skipped sex at birth, answered current gender and the
scales, but then failed to click through the feedback page. It is not clear whether these
respondents might have broken off their participation out of discomfort or failed to complete the
Mturk HIT for other reasons. Two other men skipped one question each; both were assigned to
the binary/conventional condition, but they skipped different questions (one sex at birth and one
the first-order scales).
Requests for clarification
Five respondents indicated some difficulty answering questions, particularly the scale items.
Most of these concerns were related to a lack of definitions and all of the respondents were male.
It is worth noting that our scale items are not unlike questions about whether a respondent
identifies as “liberal” or “conservative,” which also do not include explicit definitions for the
categories. We reproduce this feedback in its entirety:
•    the terms masculine and feminine are somewhat open to interpretation. they mean different things to different
     people and the definitions have changed over time and continue to evolve.
•    They were open ended, they need more specifics.
•    I resisted the urge to treat the paired options as dependent (e.g., top value is X and the bottom value is 1 - X).
     Adding vertical space between the two items may help.
•    I'm not totally sure what is meant by feminine and masculine; they seem like pretty loaded terms.
•    What do people use to define masculinity? Visual? Interesting study.
Explanations of responses
Nearly 200 respondents (13 percent) took the time to explain how they interpreted the questions
or some aspect of their answers. These comments are not positive or negative per se, though
many imply that the respondent saw something interesting or self-relevant in the questions. For
                                                                                                                        22	  
	  

	  
example, many explanations state that the questions gave males an opportunity to express their
feminine side, or that they let females show that they are tomboys. Others suggest some
defensiveness or sensitivity in their responses. As a group these comments also reveal the criteria
respondents used to arrive at their answers to the masculine and feminine scales, citing
appearance, hobbies, sexuality, emotionality, and occupation. Responses include:
•    Im a man I have a beard!
•    No, I think I’m pretty standard.
•    Uh, well, I'm not like LETS GO PLAY SPORTS so I didnt give myself full manliness.
•    its just how i look
•    was a tomboy. Still not afraid to get under a car hood or pick up a toad. But in my head I am very woman.
•    I am a pretty manly man I guess though I don't look it. That is I work with my hands, build stuff, do wood
     working, chop wood, and such, but I have long hair and generally try to keep my appearance nice.
•    I suppose I don't really see myself as too feminine because I don't have children and don't see myself as
     maternal. I've been single for so long, I hardly see myself as sexual. I don't often act in traditionally feminine
     ways, I suppose. I hate wearing make-up and I rarely dress in skirts. I just see myself as a human who happens
     to be a woman. I suppose I am a little masculine, but even that doesn't feel quite right since I have no desire to
     be male.
•    I feel like a typical guy, so I don't think I can provide much context to this survey unfortunately.
•    I'm a man and not a woman 100% and heterosexual. I sometimes act silly with my friends and be like I'm
     feminine but that's it.
•    Definitely made me think. I have a sensitive side but am also very masculine.
•    Sometimes I don't feel as feminine as other women.
•    I have never been confused for a woman in my entire life. This is why I put 100% masculine, and not feminine
     at all. I am not very emotional and have very guy hobbies, like soccer, basketball, and chess.
•    I gauge the strong male like a football player, oil rig worker etc... Id love to see myself that way, dont think I
     pull it off.
•    I gave myself 5's instead of 7's because I am morbidly obese, and as such have a more boxy figure than the
     typical slender hourglass that is considered a beautiful feminine shape.
•    It was very interesting to answer these questions. I have had an ex imply I was very masculine before.
•    I was in the marine corp, and I think I come off as tougher then I am, but I don't worry about it.
•    I grew up as a tomboy, and I'm an electrical engineer, a field that is almost all male. I also can have quite an
     assertive personality at times, so I feel somewhat masculine, but more feminine still.
•    Gender is not important to me. I like being female. I think I'd enjoy being male as well.
•    I only marked feminine a two because I shave most of my body hair.
•    I don't feel like I have a gender. I have never identified as female, but I've never felt a need to identify as male,
     either.
•    I am a fairly masculine homosexual. But I have my days. ;) Thanks.
•    Female but not extreme feminine, as in not prissy or girly.
•    I think I need to cut my hair and stop wearing v-necks now...
                                                                                                                         23	  
	  

