                                                                                  The Williams Institute
                                                                                                    UCLA
Title:
How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender?
Author:
Gates, Gary J.
Publication Date:
04-01-2011
Series:
Other Recent Work
Permalink:
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09h684x2
Keywords:
LGBT Demographics
Abstract:
Drawing on information from four recent national and two state-level population-based surveys,
the analyses suggest that there are more than 8 million adults in the US who are lesbian, gay,
or bisexual, comprising 3.5% of the adult population. There are also nearly 700,000 transgender
individuals in the US. In total, the study suggests that approximately 9 million Americans – roughly
the population of New Jersey – identify as LGBT. Key findings from the study include among adults
who identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual, bisexuals comprise a slight majority (1.8% compared to
1.7% who identify as lesbian or gay); women are substantially more likely than men to identify
as bisexual; estimates of those who report any lifetime same-sex sexual behavior and any same-
sex sexual attraction are substantially higher than estimates of those who identify as lesbian, gay,
or bisexual. An estimated 19 million Americans (8.2%) report that they have engaged in same-
sex sexual behavior and nearly 25.6 million Americans (11%) acknowledge at least some same-
sex sexual attraction.
Copyright Information:
All rights reserved unless otherwise indicated. Contact the author or original publisher for any
necessary permissions. eScholarship is not the copyright owner for deposited works. Learn more
at http://www.escholarship.org/help_copyright.html#reuse
                                           eScholarship provides open access, scholarly publishing
                                           services to the University of California and delivers a dynamic
                                           research platform to scholars worldwide.

How many people are
lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender?
by Gary J. Gates, Williams Distinguished Scholar                                       April 2011
Executive Summary
Increasing numbers of population-based surveys in the United States and across the world
include questions that allow for an estimate of the size of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT) population. This research brief discusses challenges associated with
collecting better information about the LGBT community and reviews eleven recent US and
international surveys that ask sexual orientation or gender identity questions. The brief
concludes with estimates of the size of the LGBT population in the United States.
Key findings from the research brief are as follows:
     An estimated 3.5% of adults in the United States identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual and
        an estimated 0.3% of adults are transgender.
     This implies that there are approximately 9 million LGBT Americans, a figure roughly
        equivalent to the population of New Jersey.
     Among adults who identify as LGB, bisexuals comprise a slight majority (1.8% compared
        to 1.7% who identify as lesbian or gay).
     Women are substantially more likely than men to identify as bisexual. Bisexuals
        comprise more than half of the lesbian and bisexual population among women in eight
        of the nine surveys considered in the brief. Conversely, gay men comprise substantially
        more than half of gay and bisexual men in seven of the nine surveys.
     Estimates of those who report any lifetime same-sex sexual behavior and any same-sex
        sexual attraction are substantially higher than estimates of those who identify as LGB.
        An estimated 19 million Americans (8.2%) report that they have engaged in same-sex
        sexual behavior and nearly 25.6 million Americans (11%) acknowledge at least some
        same-sex sexual attraction.
     Understanding the size of the LGBT population is a critical first step to informing a host
        of public policy and research topics. The surveys highlighted in this report demonstrate
        the viability of sexual orientation and gender identity questions on large national
        population-based surveys. Adding these questions to more national, state, and local
        data sources is critical to developing research that enables a better understanding of the
        understudied LGBT community.
                                                  1

Introduction
Increasing numbers of population-based surveys in the United States and across the world include
questions designed to measure sexual orientation and gender identity. Understanding the size of the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) population is a critical first step to informing a host of
public policy and research topics. Examples include assessing health and economic disparities in the
LGBT community, understanding the prevalence of anti-LGBT discrimination, and considering the
economic impact of marriage equality or the provision of domestic partnership benefits to same-sex
couples. This research brief discusses challenges associated with collecting better information about the
LGBT community and reviews findings from eleven recent US and international surveys that ask sexual
orientation or gender identity questions. The brief concludes with estimates of the size of the LGBT
population in the United States.
Challenges in measuring the                              Similar to using sexual behaviors and attraction
                                                         to capture elements of sexual orientation,
LGBT community
                                                         questions may also be devised that consider
Estimates of the size of the LGBT community
                                                         gender     expression and non-conformity
vary for a variety of reasons. These include
                                                         regardless of the terms individuals may use to
differences in the definitions of who is included
                                                         describe themselves. An example of these
in the LGBT population, differences in survey
                                                         types of questions would be consideration of
methods, and a lack of consistent questions
                                                         the relationship between the sex that
asked in a particular survey over time.
                                                         individuals are assigned at birth and the degree
                                                         to which that assignment conforms with how
In measuring sexual orientation, lesbian, gay,
                                                         they express their gender. Like the counterpart
and bisexual individuals may be identified
                                                         of measuring sexual orientation through
strictly based on their self-identity or it may be
                                                         identity, behavior, and attraction measures,
possible to consider same-sex sexual behavior
                                                         these varying approaches capture related
or sexual attraction.        Some surveys (not
                                                         dimensions of who might be classified as
considered in this brief) also assess household
                                                         transgender but may not individually address all
relationships and provide a mechanism of
                                                         aspects of assessing gender identity and
identifying those who are in same-sex
                                                         expression.
relationships. Identity, behavior, attraction,
and relationships all capture related dimensions
                                                         Another factor that can create variation among
of sexual orientation but none of these
                                                         estimates of the LGBT community is survey
measures completely addresses the concept.
                                                         methodology. Survey methods can affect the
                                                         willingness of respondents to report
Defining the transgender population can also be
                                                         stigmatizing identities and behaviors. Feelings
challenging.     Definitions of who may be
                                                         of confidentiality and anonymity increase the
considered part of the transgender community
                                                         likelihood that respondents will be more
include aspects of both gender identities and
                                                         accurate in reporting sensitive information.
varying forms of gender expression or non-
                                                         Survey methods that include face-to-face
conformity. Similar to sexual orientation, one
                                                         interviews may underestimate the size of the
way to measure the transgender community is
                                                         LGBT community while those that include
to simply consider self-identity. Measures of
                                                         methods that allow respondents to complete
identity could include consideration of terms
                                                         questions on a computer or via the internet
like transgender, queer, or genderqueer. The
                                                         may increase the likelihood of LGBT
latter two identities are used by some to
                                                         respondents identifying themselves. Varied
capture aspects of both sexual orientation and
                                                         sample sizes of surveys can also increase
gender identity.
                                                         variation. Population-based surveys with a
                                                    2

larger sample can produce more precise             Kingdom, Australia, and Norway.             All are
estimates (see SMART, 2010 for more                population-based surveys of adults, though
information about survey methodology).             some have age restrictions as noted.
A final challenge in making population-based       The lowest overall percentage comes from the
estimates of the LGBT community is the lack of     Norwegian Living Conditions Survey at 1.2%,
questions asked over time on a single large        with the National Survey of Sexual Health and
survey. One way of assessing the reliability of    Behavior, conducted in the United States,
estimates is to repeat questions over time using   producing the highest estimate at 5.6%. In
a consistent method and sampling strategy.         general, the non-US surveys, which vary from
Adding questions to more large-scale surveys       1.2% to 2.1%, estimate lower percentages of
that are repeated over time would substantially    LGB-identified individuals than the US surveys,
improve our ability to make better estimates of    which range from 1.7% to 5.6%.
the size of the LGBT population.
                                                   While the surveys show a fairly wide variation in
                                                   the overall percentage of adults who identify as
How many adults are lesbian,                       LGB, the proportion who identify as lesbian/gay
gay, or bisexual?                                  versus bisexual is somewhat more consistent
Findings shown in Figure 1 consider estimates      (see Figure 2). In six of the surveys, lesbian- and
of the percentage of adults who self-identify as   gay-identified       individuals     outnumbered
lesbian, gay, or bisexual across nine surveys      bisexuals. In most cases, these surveys were
conducted within the past seven years. Five of     roughly 60% lesbian/gay versus 40% bisexual.
those surveys were fielded in the United States    The UK Integrated Household Survey found the
and the others are from Canada, the United         proportion to be two-thirds lesbian/gay versus
                                                   one-third bisexual.
                                                 3

The National Survey of Family Growth found          of Health and Relationships both found a
results that were essentially the opposite of the   majority of respondents (55% and 59%,
UK survey with only 38% identifying as lesbian      respectively) identifying as bisexual.
or gay compared to 62% identifying as bisexual.
The National Survey of Sexual Health and            The surveys show even greater consistency in
Behavior and the Australian Longitudinal Study      differences between men and women
                                                  4

associated with lesbian/gay
versus     bisexual     identity.
Women are substantially
more likely than men to
identify as bisexual. Bisexuals
comprise more than half of
the lesbian and bisexual
population among women in
eight of the nine surveys
considered (see Figure 3).
Conversely, gay men comprise
substantially more than half
of gay and bisexual men in
seven of the nine surveys.
Four of the surveys analyzed also asked             estimates are true, it implies that approximately
questions about either sexual behavior or           0.1% of adults in California are transgender.
attraction. Within these surveys, a larger
fraction of adults report same-sex attractions      Several studies have reviewed multiple sources
and behaviors than self-identify as lesbian, gay,   to construct estimates of a variety of
or bisexual (see Figure 4). With the exception      dimensions of gender identity. Conway (2002)
of the Norwegian survey, these differences are      suggests that between 0.5% and 2% of the
substantial. The two US surveys and the             population have strong feelings of being
Australian survey all suggest that adults are two   transgender and between 0.1% and 0.5%
to three times more likely to say that they are     actually take steps to transition from one
attracted to individuals of the same-sex or have    gender to another. Olyslager and Conway
had same-sex sexual experiences than they are       (2007) refine Conway’s original estimates and
to self-identify as LGB.                            posit that at least 0.5% of the population has
                                                    taken some steps toward transition.
                                                    Researchers in the United Kingdom (Reed, et
How many adults are                                 al., 2009) suggest that perhaps 0.1% of adults
                                                    are transgender (defined again as those who
transgender?                                        have transitioned in some capacity).
Population-based data sources that estimate
the percentage of adults who are transgender
                                                    Notably, the estimates of those who have
are very rare. The Massachusetts Behavioral
                                                    transitioned are consistent with the survey-
Risk Factor Surveillance Survey represents one
                                                    based estimates from California and
of the few population-based surveys that
                                                    Massachusetts.      Those surveys both used
include a question designed to identify the
                                                    questions that implied a transition or at least
transgender population. Analyses of the 2007
                                                    discordance between sex at birth and current
and 2009 surveys suggest that 0.5% of adults
                                                    gender presentation.
aged 18-64 identified as transgender (Conron
2011).
The 2003 California LGBT Tobacco Survey found
that 3.2% of LGBT individuals identified as
transgender. Recall that the 2009 California
Health Interview Survey estimates that 3.2% of
adults in the state are LGB. If both of these
                                                  5

How many lesbian, gay, bisexual                     bisexual men. An estimate for the transgender
                                                    population is derived by averaging the findings
and transgender people are
                                                    from the Massachusetts and California surveys
there in the United States?                         cited earlier.
Federal data sources designed to provide
population estimates in the United States (e.g.,    It should be noted that some transgender
the Decennial Census or the American                individuals may identify as lesbian, gay, or
Community Survey) do not include direct             bisexual. So it is not possible to make a precise
questions regarding sexual orientation or           combined LGBT estimate. Instead, Figure 5
gender identity. The findings shown in Figure 1     presents separate estimates for the number of
suggest that no single survey offers a definitive   LGB adults and the number of transgender
estimate for the size of the LGBT community in      adults.
the United States.
                                                    The analyses suggest that there are more than 8
However, combining information from the             million adults in the US who are LGB,
population-based surveys considered in this         comprising 3.5% of the adult population. This is
brief offers a mechanism to produce credible        split nearly evenly between lesbian/gay and
estimates for the size of the LGBT community.       bisexual identified individuals, 1.7% and 1.8%,
Specifically, estimates for sexual orientation      respectively. There are also nearly 700,000
identity will be derived by averaging results       transgender individuals in the US. Given these
from the five US surveys identified in Figure 1.    findings, it seems reasonable to assert that
                                                    approximately 9 million Americans identify as
Separate averages are calculated for lesbian        LGBT.
and bisexual women along with gay and
                                                  6

Averaging measures of same-sex sexual
behavior yields an estimate of nearly 19 million
Americans (8.2%) who have engaged in same-
sex sexual behavior.1 The National Survey of
Family Growth is the only source of US data on
attraction and suggests that 11% or nearly 25.6
million Americans acknowledge at least some
same-sex sexual attraction.2
By way of comparison, these analyses suggest
that the size of the LGBT community is roughly
equivalent to the population of New Jersey.
The number of adults who have had same-sex
sexual experiences is approximately equal to
the population of Florida while those who have
some same-sex attraction comprise more
individuals than the population of Texas.
The surveys highlighted in this report
demonstrate the viability of sexual orientation
and gender identity questions on large-scale
national population-based surveys. States and
municipal governments are often testing
grounds for the implementation of new LGBT-
related public policies or can be directly
affected by national-level policies. Adding
sexual orientation and gender identity
questions to national data sources that can
provide local-level estimates and to state and
municipal surveys is critical to assessing the
potential efficacy and impact of such policies.
1
  This estimate uses data from the National Survey of
Family Growth and the General Social Survey.
2
  Since the NSFG data only survey 18-44 year olds, this
estimate assumes that patterns in this group are the same
for those aged 45 and older. It may be that older adults
are less likely to report same-sex attraction. If so, this
estimate may somewhat overstate same-sex attraction
among all adults.
                                                           7

References
Australian Longitudinal Study of Health and Relationships. Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health and
         Society, La Trobe University, Wave 1 Summary, 2005.
California Health Interview Survey, 2009. Author analyses of data using AskCHIS, UCLA Center for Health
         Policy Research.
California LGBT Tobacco Survey, 2004. Author analyses using machine-readable data file. California
         Department of Health Services, Tobacco Control Section.
Chandra, A, Mosher, WD, Copen, C. Sexual Behavior, Sexual Attraction, and Sexual Identity in the United
         States: Data from the 2006-2008 National Survey of Family Growth. National Health Statistics
         Report, Number 36, March 2011.
Note: This report includes estimates cited from the National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol
         Related Conditions and the National Survey of Sexual Health and Behavior.
Conron, KJ, Scott, G, Stowell, GS, Landers, S. Transgender Health in Massachusetts: Results from a
         Household Probability Sample of Adults, American Journal of Public Health, forthcoming.
Conway, L. How Frequently Does Transsexualism Occur?, December 2002.
Joloza, T, Evans, J, O’Brien, R. Measuring Sexual Identity: An Evaluation Report, UK Office of National
         Statistics, September 2010.
Olyslager, F, Conway, L. On the Calculation of the Prevalence of Transsexualism. Paper presented at the
         WPATH 20th International Symposium, Chicago, Illinois, September 2007.
Reed, B, Rhodes, S, Schofield, P, Wylie, K. Gender Variance in the UK: Prevalence, Incidence, Growth,
         and Geographic Distribution. Gender Identity Research and Education Society, June 2009.
SMART (Sexual Minority Assessment Research Team). Best Practices for Asking Sexual Orientation on
         Surveys. Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law, November 2009.
Smith, TW, Marsden, P, Hout, M, Kim, J. Author analyses of 2008 General Social Survey using machine-
         readable data file. National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago, 2009.
Tjepkema, M. Health care use among gay, lesbian and bisexual Canadians. Statistics Canada, Health
         Reports, 19:1, March 2008.
About the Author
Gary J. Gates, PhD is the Williams Distinguished Scholar at the Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law. He
studies the demographic and economic characteristics of the LGBT population.
About the Institute
The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy at UCLA School
of Law advances law and public policy through rigorous, independent research and scholarship, and
disseminates its work through a variety of education programs and media to judges, legislators, lawyers,
other policymakers and the public. These studies can be accessed at the Williams Institute website.
                                       For more information
                                  The Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law
                                                  Box 951476
                                        Los Angeles, CA 90095‐1476
                                                (310)267‐4382
                    williamsinstitute@law.ucla.edu www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute
                                                       8

