      Social Forces Advance Access published March 2, 2015
                                                                                     The Economy of Race among Daters 1
The Economy of Race among Daters
Is Love (Color) Blind? The Economy of Race among
Gay and Straight Daters
Jennifer H. Lundquist, University of Massachusetts–Amherst
Ken-Hou Lin, University of Texas–Austin
                                                                                                                                    Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
A
       drawback to research on interracial couplings is that it almost exclusively stud-
       ies heterosexual relationships. However, compelling new evidence from analy-
       ses using the Census shows that interracial relationships are significantly more
common among the gay population. It is unclear how much of this reflects weaker racial
preference or more limited dating markets. This paper examines the interactions of
white gay and straight online daters who have access to a large market of potential
partners by modeling dyadic messaging behaviors. Results show that racial prefer-
ences are highly gendered, and do not line up neatly by gay or straight identity. White
lesbians and straight men show the weakest same-race preference, followed by gay
men, while straight women show the strongest same-race preference. Put differently,
minority men are discriminated to a greater degree than minority women in both same-
sex and different-sex dating markets. These results suggest that white gay men’s higher
rates of interracial cohabitation are driven more by constrained dating markets, while
lesbians’ appear to be driven by more open racial preferences.
Introduction
A major drawback to existing research on interracial intimate relationships is
that it largely studies heterosexual married relationships. This is because most
studies rely on national intermarriage rates, which exclude the gay and lesbian
population. Because this population is small, most alternative sources of data for
nonmarried relationships contain too few cases to analyze. However, evidence
from qualitative studies and a few analyses using the Census data suggest that
interracial partnering is significantly more common among the gay population
than among the straight population. This difference is commonly attributed to
weaker racial preference among the gay population (Schwartz and Graf 2009),
while others speculate that it is the result of a smaller, more constrained partner
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2013 Annual Meeting of the Population Association
of America. The authors thank Christine Schwartz, Krista Gile, Amy Schalet, and four anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments. Direct all correspondence to Jennifer Lundquist, SBS Dean’s
Office, 236 Draper Hall, 40 Campus Center Way, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 10003,
USA. E-mail: lundquist@sbs.umass.edu.
© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the                   Social Forces 00(00) 1–27, Month 2015
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. All rights reserved. For permissions,                         doi: 10.1093/sf/sov008
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

2 Social Forces
  market (Ellingson 2004; Kurdek 2003, 2004). This paper brings unique interac-
  tion-level data to bear on this debate. By examining the behavior of white gay
  and straight daters on a large dating website, we provide new insight on whether
  white gay men and women have weaker racial preferences than straight daters at
  the very early stages of the dating process.
  Same-Sex Interracial Partnering
                                                                                           Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  The literature on race and gay partnerships is small but growing. Some qualita-
  tive research suggests that interracial boundaries are more often crossed in same-
  sex couplings (Stacey 2011; Kennedy and Davis 1993). This was impossible to
  verify empirically until fairly recently, when the Census began collecting informa-
  tion about same-sex unions. Quantitative analyses of same-sex households in the
  US Census corroborate the findings of earlier qualitative studies. Descriptive sta-
  tistics on household racial exogamy from the 2000 US Census show that gay
  householders are more likely to be in different-race partnerships than straights.
  Figure 1 shows percentages of co-residential partners of all races, ages 20–34,
  who differ from each other in their racial background. Heterosexual marriages
  display the lowest racial exogamy, at 9 percent. By contrast, 21 percent of gay
  male partners and 17 percent of gay female partners are exogamous.
     Census data on cohabiting patterns are relatively new, and data pertaining to
  same-sex cohabiters are even more recent. Multivariate analyses show unex-
  plained higher rates of interracial unions among same-sex households. In 1990,
  same-sex couples, particularly men, were more likely to be interracial than either
  different-sex married or cohabiting households (Jepsen and Jepsen 2002). Studies
  using later Census data yielded similar results, indicating that same-sex partner-
  ships are more likely to be interracial than different-sex cohabiting partnerships,
  and especially more so than different-sex marital unions (Rosenfeld and Kim
  2005; Schwartz and Graf 2009; Gates 2012). Furthermore, gay households are
  slightly more likely than lesbian households to be interracial (Schwartz and
  Graf 2009).
  Figure 1.  2000 Census: Percentage of age 20–34 same-sex and different-sex interracial
  households (data taken from weighted 5 percent 2000 IPUMS sample)
  Different-sex married couples
  Different-sex cohabiting couples
  Same-sex cohabiting female couples
  Same-sex cohabiting male couples
                                                 10    12     14 16       18    20
                                                            % Couples

                                                       The Economy of Race among Daters 3
   While these studies shed the first light on differences in homogamy between
same-sex and different-sex households, there are serious shortcomings. Because
of sample size limitations, these Census studies do not go beyond an analysis of
generic in-group/out-group pairings; thus, we don’t know whether particular
racial groups behave differently toward specific out-groups. One exception, how-
ever, shows that whites in same-sex households are least likely to be in an inter-
racial partnership (21 percent), followed by blacks (46 percent), then Hispanics
(63 percent) and Asians (80 percent), who are most likely to be in different-race
                                                                                            Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
same-sex households (Kastanis and Wilson 2014). Unfortunately, this report does
not distinguish households by gender of couples and does not go beyond a bivar-
iate analysis. Moreover, the Census provides data only on cohabiting relation-
ships. Most importantly, severe misestimation of same-sex householding1 in the
Census data may make it an unreliable tool for examining trends among same-
sex couples.
Explanations
It is often argued that gays and lesbians are more progressive and liberal leaning
than straights, even after controlling for differences in education and geography.
Some evidence suggests that the lesbian and gay population is more socially and
politically liberal (Pew Research Center 2013). Studies also show that same-sex
couples report a more egalitarian division of labor in their cohabiting relation-
ships than heterosexual couples (Weisshaar 2014; Kurdek 1993). Living as a
marginalized sexual minority may lend itself to more socially progressive per-
sonal views, particularly if transgressing one normative boundary (sexual iden-
tity) enables one to more readily transcend other societal boundaries (Rosenfeld
and Kim 2005). In the popular media, Apple CEO Tim Cook recently embraced
this view when describing being gay as giving him a “deeper understanding of
what it means to be in the minority” and providing “a window into the challenges
that people in other minority groups face every day” (Cook 2014). Given greater
alleged empathy for other minorities, lesbians and gays may thus draw less
restrictive race boundaries around their intimate partner choices. We call this the
“presumed progressive” hypothesis.
    Further, Rosenfeld and Kim (2005) theorize that same-sex couples are less
influenced by familial control, since they tend to live farther away from their
families of origin. They may also be more emotionally alienated from family if
they had an unsupportive coming-out experience. To the extent that intergenera-
tional family influence has a conservatizing effect on offspring, gays and lesbians
are likely to be less traditional in many of their behaviors, including partner
choice.
    An alternative argument to the foregoing hypothesis is constrained partner
markets.2 For a population that experiences stigma (albeit lessening in urban
areas and among youth) in an already-small population demographic, locating
similar potential partners may be challenging. One study of college men shows
that gay men are disadvantaged in their search for romantic partners because
they lack access to normative dating structures that straight men enjoy (Barrios
and Lundquist 2012). Thus, the prevalence of cross-racial pairings may simply

4 Social Forces
  reflect less opportunity for homophilous mate selection compared to different-sex
  couples (Ellingson 2004; Kurdek 2003, 2004). It has therefore been suggested
  that gay exogamy is driven more by the thin dating market than by greater race-
  open preferences.
     This is influenced, in part, by other literature that paints a decidedly less race-
  friendly picture than the foregoing scholarship does. Gay minorities frequently
  report marginalization in what are seen as white-centered gay social settings
  (Stokes and Peterson 1998; Beeker et al. 1998). Studies of the gay movement have
                                                                                           Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  documented pervasive central exclusions along lines of race, gender, and class
  (Armstrong 2003). Indeed, most research documents the reproduction of the
  larger society’s racial inequalities within the gay community (Chasin 2000).
  Racial sexual stereotypes are commonly described among the gay community, as
  well as stigmatic terms to describe gay men who date outside their race, such as
  “dinge queen” (Boykin 1996; Reid-Pharr 2001; Wilson 2009). Black men report
  that white men often treat them as hyper-masculinized sexual objects, while
  Asian men report stereotyping by white men as effeminate and sexually unap-
  pealing (Wilson et al. 2009).
     The growing field of masculinity studies sheds light on the complexities of
  interracial sexuality and desire among gay men (this area continues to be under-
  studied for lesbian women). The idealization and construction of hegemonically
  masculine norms has been documented among gay men (Connell 1992), which
  manifests itself in the intersection of racial stereotypes. Racialized images of black
  men as virile and hypermasculine have led to the fetishization of the black body
  by white gay men (Collins 2004; Green 2008; Reid-Pharr 2001; Wilson et al.
  2009). The constrictive “erotic capital” of this black male archetype plays out in
  male escort services, where black dominants (tops) receive the highest price for
  their services, while more effeminate black men (bottoms) are the most penalized
  and least desired (Logan 2010). The erotic premium enjoyed by those black men
  who do not violate their sexually aggressive stereotype is unlikely to pay off
  beyond sexual relations, however. In 70 interviews with gay men, Green (2008)
  finds that Asian and black men alike more often experience romantic rejection
  compared to white men, who enjoy a privileged position of being desired by both
  minorities and whites alike.
     Rather than having a liberalizing effect on other social boundaries, perhaps the
  transgression of one identity in the race, class, gender tripartite brings about
  greater pressure to conform to remaining boundaries. This effect has been shown
  in a study of identity formation among youth (Wilkins 2008), and homophobia
  among straight African American men has been attributed to this (Froyum 2007).
  Expressed Racial Preference Studies
  One way to gain leverage on the greater-race-openness hypothesis versus the
  ­constrained-dating-market theory is to examine expressed racial preferences of
   non-straight daters. Dating websites provide a glimpse into preference, since they
   are perhaps the only remaining social venue where it is normative to announce
   one’s racial preferences—and exclusions. Two Internet-based preference studies
   examine the dating behaviors of same-sex adults. The first study found that

                                                         The Economy of Race among Daters 5
 s­ ame-sex daters were overall more likely to prefer whites than straight daters
  (Tsunokai, Kposowa, and Adams 2009). The study did not test for interactions
   between gender and sexual identity or between race and sexual identity, so it is
   unclear how patterns may vary across gay versus lesbian identities or white versus
   minority gays. The other study, which focused only on male daters, found that gay
   white men were five times more likely than white straights to express a same race
   preference (Phua and Kaufman 2003).
      While these studies suggest that gay daters are less race open than straights, a
                                                                                              Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
   survey on ideal relationships among young people found conflicting results. Les-
   bians were the most open to different-race relationships, followed by straight
   women and gay men, and straight men were least open (Meier, Hull, and Ortyl
   2009). An older study showing that lesbians deemphasize physical and economic
   characteristics of their potential dating partners (Deaux and Hanna 1984) sug-
   gests that lesbians may place less emphasis on race than straight women.
      While literature on the racial boundaries among gays and lesbians remains
   sparse, recent studies utilizing alternative data sources have made significant
   progress in our understanding of the preferences among heterosexual daters.
   These studies consistently show that straights operate under strong same-group
   homophily preferences and behaviors (Feliciano, Lee, and Robnett 2011; Hitsch,
 Hortaçsu, and Ariely 2010). Studies that evaluate message-sending and -receiving
 behaviors among online daters have nuanced these findings by showing that
 same-race homophily is strongest when initiating first contact but weaker upon
 receiving a message from someone of a different race (Lewis 2013; Lin and
  ­Lundquist 2013). However, the response behavior is still tempered by a gendered
   and racialized hierarchy. While white men commonly respond to messages from
   every out-group except black women, white women still tend to ignore all but
   whites (Lin and Lundquist 2013).
      Most of the dating preference and behavioral analyses consistently support a
   similar gender pattern, finding that straight white women exhibit more rigid race
   boundaries than straight white men (Fisman et al. 2006; Feliciano, Lee, and
­Robnett 2011; Robnett and Feliciano 2011; Tsunokai, Kposowa, and Adams
 2009). This contradicts the assumption that women should be more race tolerant
 than men, based on feminine socialization toward more affective and cooperation-
 focused behaviors (Cross and Madsen 1997; Johnson and Marini 1998). Another
   explanation is the heterosexual beauty-status exchange hypothesis, whereby men
   are theorized to prioritize physical characteristics in selecting a mate whereas
   women prioritize income and economic stability (Goode 1996; South 1991). Since
   race historically has a strong predictive power over one’s socioeconomic status,
   women may use it as a proxy to estimate potential partners’ future income. But
   there has been considerable change in gender norms among younger generations.
   Some recent behavioral studies find no support for the beauty-status exchange
   hypothesis, showing that men and women equally prioritize physical attractive-
   ness above many other factors in their dating partners (Eastwick and Finkel 2008;
 Luo and Zhang 2009; McClintock 2014). Yet, other studies continue to find evi-
   dence, albeit lessened, for a gendered exchange pattern, showing that female dat-
   ers value income more highly than physical appearance compared to men (Hitsch,
   Hortaçsu, and Ariely 2010) and that men respond more strongly than women to

6 Social Forces
  physical attractiveness (Fisman et al. 2006; Li et al. 2002; Li and Kenrick 2006).
  Nevertheless, this hypothesis fails to explain why Asian men, who on average earn
  no less than white men, are not as preferred.
  Data
  An interactive, online-dating setting has far fewer partner market constraints
  than most social settings, and thus provides a unique opportunity to examine the
                                                                                           Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  racial preferences held by gay and lesbian daters. Census data provide informa-
  tion on a cohabiting relationship only after it has formed, offering little insight on
  the level of interracial exposure during the mate selection process. We examine
  whether white same-sex daters are more racially inclusive than their different-sex
  white counterparts when they are exposed to a wide range of potential partners.
  If they still are, we can confirm that the presumed progressive hypothesis at least
  partially explains the coupling patterns of gays and lesbians. On the other hand,
  if we find same-sex daters to be no different, or even less inclusive, we can con-
  clude that market constraints may play a critical role in generating the interracial
  pairing differences between the gay and straight population.
       Although there are clear limitations, including sample representativeness, our
  lack of messaging and photograph data, and the fact that online exchanges are
  less significant than formal marital and cohabiting relationships, examining the
  interactions among Internet daters gives us several analytical advantages. First,
  we are able to observe the entire dater pool for each individual dater, which
  allows us to take the opportunity structure into account when detecting racial
  preferences. Second, daters in our sample have a clear incentive to accurately
  report their sexual identity, and thus we avoid a major measurement issue in
  terms of sexual identity. Furthermore, daters operate under the assumption that
  their decisions are unobservable to most other daters, which alleviates the
  ­potential social desirability bias that could be common among preference
   ­statement studies.
       Finally, data generated from dating websites allow us to examine interracial
    pairing behaviors at an unprecedented level of detail. Census studies have been
    unable to examine specific racial sorting patterns within gay and lesbian house-
    holds. We examine whether similar sub-racial hierarchies exist within gay and
    lesbian partnering patterns as they do among straight women and men. Since our
    previous study indicates that whites have the most dominant racial status and
    appear to be the gatekeepers of interracial relationships (Lin and Lundquist
    2013), we focus our analysis on white dater behavior. We ask, do white lesbians
    and gay men have weaker racial and in-group preferences than white straight
    women and men? And, if so, do such preferences vary by the specific racial iden-
    tity of the out-group?
       We obtained our data from one of the largest and most popular US dating
    websites,3 which facilitates both heterosexual and same-sex dating for millions of
    active users. Registered users can create a personal profile, search and view other
    users’ profiles, and contact others through a website-based messaging system. A
    typical user profile contains basic information such as sex, sexual orientation,
    geographical location, age, race, height, body shape, religion, language, lifestyle

                                                           The Economy of Race among Daters 7
and socioeconomic status, as well as photographs and short essays. Unlike most
large dating websites that charge a membership fee to contact other users, this
website places no restriction on usage, making it an advantageous data source for
studying online dating behavior. The website does not recommend potential
matches by ethnic-racial status. The only criteria used to select which profiles to
appear first are geographical adjacency, age, sexual orientation, and the matching
score, which is derived from personality questions.
     While our sample is not representative of the US population, a growing litera-
                                                                                                Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
 ture indicates that Internet daters are not as selective as previously assumed. A
 recent study found that Internet daters differ little after controlling for Internet
 access and computer usage (Sautter, Tippett, and Morgan 2010). That said, online
 daters generally do tend to be younger and of higher socioeconomic status than
 those who lack access to the Internet. Furthermore, our particular dating site is
 believed to attract a slightly more educated and intellectual clientele even more
 so than other online sites. Since education status is associated with more positive
 attitudes toward interracial relations, we would expect the daters in our sample
 to have more inclusive racial preferences than the general population and perhaps
 than other sites. Moreover, Internet daters who use mainstream dating websites
 are likely to have more liberal attitudes toward dating across racial lines than
 those who use ethnic dating websites exclusively. Taking these together, we expect
 to underestimate the significance of racial preferences in the US dating market.
     In addition, the digital divide is rapidly decreasing. Among Americans aged
 18–49, 91 percent report using the Internet (Zickuhr and Smith 2012). Seventy-
 four percent of American Internet users who report looking for romantic partners
 have used the Internet to find dates; half of these individuals have gone on to date
 the people they met online, and 17 percent have entered into committed relation-
 ships as a result (Madden and Lenhart 2006). Nor is there evidence that interra-
 cial couples are more likely to have met on the Internet than in face-to-face
 settings (Rosenfeld and Thomas 2012). A nationally representative survey that
 examines relationship formation finds that the Internet is now one of the primary
 ways that heterosexual and same-sex couples meet each other (Rosenfeld and
 Thomas 2012). One study even found an association between the penetration of
 high-speed Internet access into geographical regions of the United States and an
 increase in marriage rates among young people in those areas (Bellou 2013).
     Our original data set consists of approximately nine million registered users
 worldwide and 200 million messages, from November 2003 to October 2010. To
 facilitate the analysis, we filter the users in three steps. We limit our scope to users
 who reside in the 20 largest metropolitan areas in the United States. This enables
 the reconstruction of opportunity structure (discussed below) and brings down
 the sample size to about three million daters. We exclude users who did not send
 or receive at least one message, did not upload at least one photograph, who
 listed their birth year later than 1992 or earlier than 1911, or who fit the profile
 of spammer users. This is because, similar to most free-membership websites,
 some of the users did not actively engage or even return to the website after initial
 registration, and a few users are likely to be fake identities created by spammers.
 We thus retain only actively dating website members. In the profile creation
­process, individuals must first identify themselves as either male or female, and

8 Social Forces
  then as heterosexual, gay, or bisesexual. We exclude those identifying as bisexual,
  whom we analyze at another time.4 Our final sample consists of 32,351 lesbians,
  51,606 gay men, 405,021 straight women, and 528,800 straight men.
  Analytical Approach
  Our main analytical inquiry focuses on dyadic interaction controlling for each
  individual’s demographic and personal characteristics. We examine how the like-
                                                                                                  Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  lihood of sending and responding to an initial message among daters is shaped by
  the daters’ race. Since interaction decisions are nested within individuals (i in the
  sending model and j in the responding model), a dependence structure is expected.
  We thus model both the sending and the responding behaviors by fitting a series
  of generalized estimating equations (Liang and Zeger 1986; Hanley et al. 2003;
  Zuur et al. 2009) with the logit link function and an exchangeable correlation
  structure.5
     We control for confounding factors with the following covariate groupings:
  basic demographic information, lifestyle, socioeconomic status, and degree of
  online engagement. Basic demographic information includes age, height, body
  type, and geographic location. Lifestyle variables include smoking, drinking, drug
  use habits, and parental status/preferences. Socioeconomic status consists of edu-
  cation level, income level, and the number of languages one speaks. In addition,
  we control for the daters’ degree of engagement, which includes total time spent
  on the website, total account lifetime (from registration to the last log-in), the
  number of photographs uploaded to the website, and the number of personality
  questions answered on the website.
     We first examine, among all probable dyads, how the racial identity of the
  potential sender and that of the receiver jointly predict whether an initial message
  is sent. To do so, we randomly sample a subset of users and reconstruct their
  opportunity structure on the website,6 which generates all probable dyads on the
  website for this subset of users. We then merge these dyads with the initial mes-
  sages that were actually sent, yielding a binary outcome where 1 indicates that
  the probable dyad was realized and 0 otherwise. We specify the model predicting
  the sending behavior as
                                           K                           K
                  logit (yi , j ) = α1 +   ∑
                                           k
                                               β1,kGk + β2O +         ∑β
                                                                       k
                                                                               GkO
                                                                            3, k
                                      P
                                  +   ∑β
                                      p
                                           4, p   Xp,i Xp, j + β5Wi , j + β6 Mi + ε i , j ,
  	                                                                                           	
  where yi,j denotes whether an initial message was sent from i to j, G denotes the
   sexual identity group of the sender, O denotes the out-group (i.e., non-white)
   status of j, β3 denotes the interaction effects between G and O, X denotes the
  attributes of user i and j in table 3, W denotes the log-transformed overlapping
  website membership periods between i and j, and M denotes the number of
  ­messages user i received per 100 days.

                                                                                                 The Economy of Race among Daters 9
   We next examine the likelihood of responding to an initial message. We esti-
mate how the likelihood of a response is conditional on both the racial identity of
the sender and that of the receiver, while controlling for all the other attributes of
each partner. The sample of this analysis is all initial messages sent among the dat-
ers, with a dichotomous outcome indicating whether the recipient responded (1)
or not (0). Similarly, we specify the model predicting the responding behavior as
                                                     K                                       K
                logit (y j ,i ) = α 2 +              ∑   β7 ,kGk + β8O +                   ∑β
                                                                                                                                       Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
                                                                                                     GkO
                                                                                                  9, k
                                                     k                                       k
                                                 P
                                             +   ∑β
                                                 p
                                                     10, p   Xp,i Xp, j + β11 Si , j + β12 M j + ε j ,i ,
	                                                                                                                  	
where yj,i denotes whether user j responded to the initial message sent by user i,
β9 denotes the interaction effects between G and O, S denotes the matching score7
between j and i, and M denotes the number of messages user j received per
100 days. As in past studies (Lewis 2013; Lin and Lundquist 2013), we gauge
response to be an indication of interest.
   Our second set of models goes beyond the in-group/out-group divide and
examines the details of racial preference. The sending model here is specified as
                                       K                     Q
     logit(yi , j ) = α 3 +        ∑   k
                                            β13,kGk +    ∑β  q
                                                                      14, q   Rq +
                       K       Q                                 P
                    ∑∑             β15,k, qGk Rq +           ∑β          16, p   Xp,i Xp, j + β17Wi , j + β18 Mi + ε i , j ,
	                      k       q                                 p
                                                                                                                               	
where R denotes whether j identifies as Asian, black, Hispanic, white, or other,
with β15 allowing racial preferences to vary across the four sexual identity groups.
Similarly, the responding model is specified:
                                   K                     Q
    logit(yi , j ) = α 3 +     ∑   k
                                           β19,kGk +     ∑β
                                                         q
                                                                     20, q   Rq
                           K       Q                                 P
                   +   ∑∑                  β21,k, qGk Rq +       ∑β          22, p   Xp,i Xp, j + β23 Si , j + β24 Mi + ε j ,i ,
	                          k       q                                 p
                                                                                                                                   	
where R denotes whether i identifies as Asian, black, Hispanic, white, or other.
   To avoid unobserved heterogeneity bias by assuming each comparison group
has the same residual variation, a problematic assumption with logit coefficients
(see Allison 1999 and Mood 2010 for discussion), we contrast the racial prefer-
ences among sexual identity groups with predicted probabilities. We first measure
the in-group preference as the ratio between the predicted probability of interact-
ing with a non-white dater and that of interacting with a white dater. We second

10 Social Forces
  measure the preference toward Asian, black, and Hispanic daters, respectively, as
  the ratio between the predicted probability of interacting with a dater from that
  racial group and that of interacting with a white dater.
  Data Limitations
  As in other online-dating studies, confidentiality protections restrict our access to
  photographic data, messaging content, and the profile essay text. Access to the
                                                                                            Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  daters’ photographs would enable us to code for visual appearance indicators like
  skin tone, potentially disentangling how dater appearance may mediate response
  to a dater’s declared racial identity. Unfortunately, this is an omitted variable
  from our analysis. Furthermore, not knowing textual content could potentially
  lead to unobserved bias in two ways: (1) If white daters make their racial prefer-
  ences known in the essay sections, it may keep minority daters from contacting
  them; and (2) If online rejection also occurs via direct rejection articulated in an
  e-mail message rather than non-response, we will misinterpret rejection for inter-
  est (in the response models only).
     The website we use does not provide a category for users to indicate their
  racial preference; however, users may choose to express their racial preference in
  the essay section. To address point 1, we conducted extensive observations of
  hundreds of randomly selected profiles from the publicly accessible online web-
  site to assess whether racial preferences are informally included in users’ texts. It
  is very rare for users to explicitly post racial preferences or, indeed, anything
  directly referencing race at all. This might reflect the prevalence of colorblindness
  culture and/or norms around social desirability.
     Daters also are asked to answer or skip literally hundreds of personality ques-
  tions generated at random, in order to create a conglomerated matching score
  that indicates how similarly users answered overall. In the time period we ana-
  lyze, users are able to see others’ specific answers to any given personality ques-
  tion only if the user chose to make it public. Therefore, to the extent that any race
  questions were randomly generated and then answered, it is rare for users to have
  access to the specific answer another user gave. In the data-cleaning process, we
  found that even among the most frequently answered race-related questions,
  none were answered by a majority of daters. Race-oriented personality questions
  asked whether it is racist to state that one is not attracted to people of other races,
  whether couples should be prohibited from adopting a different-race child, and
  whether daters believe that race and intelligence are linked; however, only about
  1 to 5 percent of our subsamples answered these questions. Between 30 and 40
  percent of daters answered either “Would you strongly prefer to date someone of
  your own skin color/racial background?” or “If you were going to have a child,
  would you want the other parent to be of the same ethnicity as you?” These ques-
  tions, when answered, are rarely made public. We conclude that unobserved race
  signaling on profiles exists, but is rare. If it were more common, our analysis
  would overestimate the general willingness to interact with daters from other
  groups due to the selection process. However, such a bias would shift our esti-
  mates for all groups in the same direction and therefore has limited impact on our
  substantive findings and the conclusion. Nevertheless, the lack of essay content

                                                        The Economy of Race among Daters 11
overall will bias our results in unknown ways, since it would provide data around
personality and preferences that our control variables may not be capturing.
    The second issue is over how we measure rejection for the response models.
Because we lack messaging content, we assume that if daters are interested, they
will message back, and if they are not interested, they will not respond. Given
confidentiality protections that restrict access to personal content, this approach
is the accepted unit of measurement in other online dating studies as well (Lewis
2013; Lin and Lundquist 2013). Anecdotal evidence and emerging consensus in
                                                                                              Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
online-dating discussions suggest that polite but uninterested response (a false
positive) is the exception to the rule for rejection in the online environment, given
the low social costs of not responding.8 While we acknowledge that some daters
may nevertheless send direct rejection notification (and this may be more true of
older generations of daters), it is not the prevailing norm. Our data show that
sending a response is extremely rare (table 2), suggesting that the content of
response messages is socially meaningful. As such, we interpret response messages
as an approximation of reciprocated interest. Finally, we have no reason to think
that false positive responses, to the extent that they occur, would vary by sexual
identity, which is the driving comparison of our analysis.
    Given the newness of web-based dating sites, knowledge is lacking about the
culture and meta-practices of the online dating process. The emergence of big
data is outpacing the evolution of standards and agreed-upon approaches to its
analysis. Future research could shed light on these questions by interviewing
online daters about their experiences.
Summary Statistics
We identify a user’s racial identity using the information on their personal pro-
files. There are ten ethnicity boxes users can check when they fill out their per-
sonal profiles. The options are Asian, Middle Eastern, black, Native American,
Indian,9 Pacific Islander, Hispanic/Latino, white, other, and undeclared. Users can
check as many boxes as they prefer. We categorize those who did not check any
box as undeclared and those who checked more than one box as multiracial. Our
initial sample thus consists of 11 ethnic-racial groups, with the 10 default catego-
ries and the multiracial group.
    Table 1 presents the ethnic and racial composition of our analytical sample.
About half of the user populations self-identify as non-Hispanic white, although
this number is slightly lower for gays than straights.10 About 24 percent of the
straight sample did not specify any ethnic and racial identity, compared to a
slightly lower percentage of the gay sample, although the vast majority of these
cases are incomplete profiles, as we found upon further analysis.11 Once incom-
plete profiles are ruled out, the number of cases without a racial self-identification
is closer to 7 percent. Blacks and Hispanics are significantly underrepresented in
our sample, especially among straights. About 4 percent of the users identified
themselves as black (this is only slightly higher when excluding “undeclared”), in
contrast to 12 percent in the US population. Slightly higher percentages of the
users identified as Hispanic/Latino, in contrast to 16 percent of the US popula-
tion.12 One group that is overrepresented is multiracial users (at between 7 and

12 Social Forces
  Table 1.  Ethnic-Racial Composition of the Sample
   Race                         Straight men     Straight women   Gay men   Lesbians
   Asian                            3.28%              3.69%       4.92%     2.63%
   Middle Eastern                   0.36%              0.26%       0.39%     0.32%
   Black                            3.35%              3.86%       3.67%     4.96%
   Native American                  0.23%              0.26%       0.12%     0.23%
   Indian                           0.81%              0.47%       0.51%     0.18%
                                                                                         Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
   Pacific Islander                 0.25%              0.24%       0.60%     0.33%
   Hispanic                         4.97%              4.66%       7.83%     6.43%
   White                           52.05%             53.67%      50.59%    48.67%
   Other                            1.47%              1.48%       1.59%     2.21%
   Undeclared/incomplete           25.24%             24.36%      19.63%    22.70%
   profile
   Multiracial                      7.99%              7.05%      10.15%    11.34%
   N                              528,800             405,021     51,606    32,351
  8 percent for straights and 10–11 percent for gays), who are often counted as 2
  percent in the national population.13 For the analyses that follow in this paper, we
  focus on white users’ messaging behaviors toward white, Asian, black, His-
  panic,14 and other users. As in the Census, whites are the largest group in our
  data, with a sample size that allows us to model the most detailed intergroup
  cross-racial interactions.
     We model the likelihood of initial messages exchanged between any two users
  who both reside in the same metropolitan area. Table 2 presents the descriptive
  statistics on initial messages received by and sent from white daters. The first
  detail to note is that the likelihood of interaction, on the whole, is quite low
  across all the groups. We interpret this to indicate that when solicitations and,
  more rarely, responses do occur, they are indications of interest—even though we
  do not know the content of the messages themselves. Even considering that the
  express purpose of the website is for singles to find romantic partners, if there
  were a high degree of e-mail chatter between users, we might be less confident in
  deducing that messages indicate some degree of attraction between daters. Online
  interaction is asymmetrical in several ways (which can be observed only among
  the straight population). The pattern fits the gendered heteronormative expecta-
  tion that men initiate contact: white straight men in our sample, on average, sent
  70 percent more messages than their white straight women counterparts but
  received less than half their number of messages. Of the groups, initial messages
  sent by white straight men to women were the least likely to get a response. Only
  2.8 percent of the messages sent by white straight men received a response, in
  contrast with 5.6 percent of messages sent by white straight women. Some of this
  difference may stem from the straight gender ratio imbalance we find in our data,
  at 12 percent more straight male users than straight female users. Among white
  gay daters, men have higher volumes of message exchange than lesbians,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The Economy of Race among Daters 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e­xchanging twice as many between each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      other compared to women. The difference
                                                                                                    SD     2.76                          7.66
                                                                             White lesbians
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      between the distribution of messages sent and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that received is also worth noting. For white
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      straight men, gay men, and lesbians, the vari-
                                                                                                    Mean                                                           31535                          5.03%           30754                      5.16%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ance of the messages sent is significantly
                                                                                                           2.00                          1.95                                                                                                                         larger than that of the messages received,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      indicating a large degree of heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the level of active participation.
                                                                                                    SD     6.91                          18.01                                                                                                                       Control Variables
                                                                             White gay men
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the control variables. The average age of the
                                                                                                                                                                   136264                                         123642
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sample is younger than that of the general
                                                                                                    Mean   5.22                          4.74                                                     4.56%                                      5.04%                   population. Gay and lesbian daters are about
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     two years younger than straight daters. White
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     daters also have higher educational attain-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ment than the national population. Between
                                                                             White straight women
                                                                                                    SD     10.74                         13.54                                                                                                                       43 and 51 percent of gay and straight men
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and women report a college degree or more,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in contrast with 32.8 percent of Americans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aged 25 to 34.15 The heights of male and
                                                                                                                                                                   1730076                        2.58%           764749                     5.59%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     female users are also about 10 centimeter/4
                                                                                                    Mean   7.96                          3.52                                                                                                                        inches higher than the average American.16
Table 2.  Descriptive Statistics on Initial Messages Exchanged among Users
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     We suspect this is due to the tendency that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     users over-report their height, rather than the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     selectivity of Internet daters. While omitted-
                                                                                                           5.39                          30.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     variable bias is certainly a concern in our
                                                                             White straight men
                                                                                                    SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     data, we find it compelling that misreporting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of the variables we are able to measure will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     not bias the results, since other daters are also
                                                                                                                                                                   814402                                         1658718
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     using this same information, however exag-
                                                                                                    Mean   2.96                          6.03                                                     5.47%                                      2.82%                   gerated, to determine whether to interact with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     any given online dater.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Table 3 also shows that there are a number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of gender differences between the groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Regardless of sexuality, women are more
                                                                                                                                                                   Total # of messages received
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     likely than men to consider themselves over-
                                                                                                           Avg. # of messages received
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     weight, while men are more likely to describe
                                                                                                                                         Avg. # of messages sent                                                  Total # of messages sent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     themselves as average or fit. While majorities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Others’ response rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of all four groups decline to disclose their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     income, straight men are least likely to do
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Response rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     this. There are also differences in online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     engagement. Although straight women spend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     similar amounts of time on the website as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     men, they have the shortest account lifetimes.

14 Social Forces
  Table 3.  Descriptive Statistics on Control Variables
                                         White        White straight   White gay      White
                                     straight men       women           men          lesbians
   Age                                  30.54              30.14        28.68        27.92
   (S.D.)                                 9.34              9.75         8.44          8.14
   Height (in cm)                      179.98             165.93       179.35       165.93
   (S.D.)                                 7.41              7.07         7.21          7.14
                                                                                                 Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
   Height–not specified                   0.0096            0.0099       0.0079        0.0144
   Height–top coded                       0.0006            0.0004       0.0003        0.0004
   Height–bottom coded                    0.0008            0.0003       0.0002        0.0004
   Body type
   Thin                                   0.08              0.10         0.16          0.10
   Overweight                             0.07              0.21         0.09          0.19
   Average                                0.21              0.20         0.24          0.21
   Fit                                    0.29              0.14         0.23          0.18
   Unspecified                            0.34              0.35         0.28          0.32
   Region
   Northeast                              0.33              0.38         0.43          0.37
   Southeast                              0.10              0.09         0.07          0.09
   Midwest                                0.16              0.15         0.14          0.14
   West                                   0.31              0.28         0.29          0.32
   Southwest                              0.10              0.09         0.07          0.08
   Smoking
   Yes                                    0.27              0.24         0.26          0.36
   No                                     0.69              0.71         0.69          0.59
   Unspecified                            0.05              0.05         0.05          0.05
   Drinking
   Often                                  0.14              0.13         0.16          0.14
   Socially                               0.61              0.64         0.61          0.62
   Rarely                                 0.15              0.14         0.13          0.14
   Not at all                             0.08              0.06         0.07          0.07
   Unspecified                            0.03              0.03         0.03          0.03
   Drug use
   Never                                  0.74              0.79         0.74          0.66
   Sometimes                              0.11              0.07         0.11          0.15
   Unspecified                            0.15              0.13         0.15          0.19
   Parental Status/ Preference
   Has Children                           0.12              0.17         0.01          0.06
   Likes Child                            0.47              0.49         0.43          0.51
                                                                                   (Continued)

                                                        The Economy of Race among Daters 15
Table 3.  continued
                                 White      White straight     White gay       White
                             straight men     women             men           lesbians
Doesn’t like/want child           0.09           0.09              0.18         0.14
Unspecified                       0.32           0.24              0.37         0.29
Education
High School or Less               0.37           0.34              0.35         0.41
                                                                                              Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
Some College                      0.05           0.05              0.03         0.03
College                           0.36           0.38              0.39         0.33
Professional                      0.09           0.12              0.12         0.10
Unspecified                       0.13           0.11              0.11         0.13
Income
< 20,000                          0.07           0.07              0.08         0.09
20,000–50,000                     0.16           0.11              0.10         0.10
50,000–80,000                     0.08           0.03              0.04         0.03
80,000–150,000                    0.05           0.01              0.02         0.01
< 150,000                         0.02           0.01              0.01         0.01
Unspecified                       0.62           0.77              0.75         0.77
Engagement
Online Time (in 15 min)         143.82         145.09           137.89        149.29
SD                              527.82         518.95           499.09        503.99
Account Life Time (in day)      387.47         286.18           391.64        343.08
SD                              478.11         400.82           464.99        430.22
Photos Uploaded                   3.88           4.01              4.46         4.49
SD                                2.56           2.62              2.64         2.74
Questions Answered              233.03         183.84           215.42        196.48
SD                              407.34         339.43           345.40        344.51
This may be due to the gender ratio imbalance on the website, with straight
women in greater demand and more quickly able to locate potential matches (or
grow overwhelmed and give up). Men, both gay and straight, have longer
account lifetimes and answer more personality questions on their profiles. Gay
daters also upload greater numbers of their pictures than straights to the site,
which may exacerbate omitted-variable bias more for non-straight daters than
straight daters.
Results
In our first group of models, we interact the characteristics of each dater’s and
their potential partners’ characteristics with one another, including one’s sexual
orientation and their relative likelihood of interacting with any out-group
member versus a same-race member. Figure 2 shows the relative likelihood of

16 Social Forces
  Figure 2.  Predicted probabilities with confidence intervals of interacting with out-group
  relative to white in-group
                   A            Sending                     B             Responding
      Gay women
         Gay men
                                                                                                       Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  Straight women
     Straight men
                    0.3   0.4   0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8               0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0           1.1    1.2
                                  Odds ratio of interacting with non-white, white = 1
  Note: These figures show interaction probabilities after controlling for all independent variables
  from table 3. i = 5,054,614 for sending model; n = 2,712,277 for responding model.
  i­ nteracting with an out-group dater for each group. We generate predicted prob-
   abilities by holding all independent variables at their observed values, and we
   depict the relative predicted probability ratios by dividing the predicted probabil-
   ity of interacting with an out-group by the predicted probability of interacting
   with an in-group. Thus, the larger the ratio, the weaker the same-race preference.
   While the ratios show that each group is more likely to contact an in-group dater
   over an out-group dater, there are clear group differences in how strong same-
   race preferences are. Panel A depicts the relative probability of sending an initial
   message to a non-white group, while panel B shows the relative probability of
   responding to an out-group dater after first receiving a message from them (full
   coefficients from the GEE models are shown in appendix 1A).
       Figure 2 shows that straight white women are less likely than any other group
   to send or respond to out-groups. Straight white men and lesbians, on the other
   hand, are most likely to contact and respond to out-groups. Gay white men fall
   somewhere between these two trends.17 A notable difference between panels A
   and B is that responding ratios are substantially larger than sending ratios for all
   the groups.18 This indicates that white daters are generally more likely to respond
   to out-groups than they are to initiate contact, even though they still respond
   most often to their white in-group (except for straight men, who are equally
   likely to respond to both). We theorize that response rates may more accurately
   reflect the “revealed preferences” of daters. That is, when a dater initiates first
   contact, their behavior is likely to be dictated by how they might anticipate other
   groups will respond to them. By contrast, there is little risk of rejection when
   someone has already reached out to them. Nonetheless, despite becoming more
   open to out-groups in the context of responding, the patterned hierarchy of how
   white gender and sexual identity groups respond does not change. This pattern
   also remains consistent when we estimate conditional predicted probabilities
   across each percentile of specific key variables (see appendix 2).

                                                                 The Economy of Race among Daters 17
   To what extent are the patterns in figure 2 being driven by which racial out-
group white daters choose to contact? Our second group of models shown in fig-
ure 3 thus asks how the patterns shown in figure 2 break down when we examine
interaction within each specific racial out-group. Panel A of figure 3 shows greater
overall spread depending on which racial group is being contacted, indicating that,
regardless of sexual identity and gender, all groups are less likely to contact black
(versus white) daters. But as for how racial preference distributes itself across each
of the white groups of daters, most of the same basic directional patterns hold
                                                                                                       Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
from figure 2. For example, white straight women are still consistently the group
Figure 3.  Predicted probabilities with confidence intervals of interacting with each racial
out-group relative to white in-group
                   A         Sending to Asians             B        Responding to Asians
    Gay women
       Gay men
 Straight women
    Straight men
                   C          Sending to blacks            D         Responding to blacks
    Gay women
       Gay men
 Straight women
    Straight men
                   E         Sending to Hispanics          F       Responding to Hispanics
    Gay women
       Gay men
 Straight women
    Straight men
                       0.2      0.4     0.6       0.8      0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0      1.2
                               Odds ratio of interacting with non-white, white = 1
Note: These figures show interaction probabilities after controlling for all independent variables
from table 3. N = 5,054,614 for sending model; n = 2,712,277 for responding model.

18 Social Forces
  with the lowest probability of interacting with each out-group and straight men
  are consistently the group most likely to do so. But there are some new variations.
  When it comes to contact with Asian daters, the basic story is that straight men
  and lesbians are more likely to interact with Asians than other minorities, while
  straight women and gay men are less likely. Specifically, straight white men are the
  most likely group to initiate contact with Asian daters and lesbians and straight
  men are most likely to respond to messages from Asian daters. Straight white
  women and gay men are least likely to send messages to Asians, and straight
                                                                                         Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  women are the least likely group to respond to Asian daters’ messages.
     In predicting the probability of contacting black daters, the confidence inter-
  vals in figure 3 show considerable overlap among the white daters, indicating that
  all groups are about equally unlikely to send a message. But in responding to
  messages sent by black daters, white straight men and lesbians are the most likely
  groups to return a message. It is notable that, while straight men’s greater likeli-
  hood of messaging Asians over black women fits with national trends in hetero-
  sexual intermarriage, white straight women’s behavior does not. Although white
  women are more likely to be married to a black man than an Asian man, here we
  see that women daters ignore both Asian and black men about equally, which is
  consistent with previous findings (Lin and Lundquist 2013). Finally, Hispanic
  daters are most likely to be contacted and responded to by straight men and least
  likely by straight women. Gay men and lesbians both fall about equally between
  these two extremes. Appendix 1B, shows the corresponding coefficients from the
  GEE models. As in appendix 2, we estimated conditional predicted probabilities
  across each percentile of specific key variables, and the patterns shown in figure 3
  are consistent. (Figures available upon request.).
     How do these results square with what we know from the literature? Analyses
  using stated-preference data found that gay whites were equally exclusionary as
  straight white daters toward black daters, but that they were less open to Asians
  and more open toward Latinos (Tsunokai, Kposowa, and Adams 2009). We find
  this same pattern when comparing straight and gay men but not women. Our
  results also corroborate the findings of Phua and Kaufman (2003), which found
  that gay white men were overall more exclusionary than straight white men. But
  perhaps most notable of all is our finding that the biggest contrast in preference
  behavior is between white straight males and white straight females. Other stud-
  ies have documented gender differences among straight daters (Hitsch, Hortaçsu,
  and Ariely 2010; Lin and Lundquist 2013; Lewis 2013), but when put in the
  context of a comparison to gay and lesbian daters, the pattern is particularly
  striking. It becomes clear that racial preference behavior may be linked more to
  gender identity than to sexual orientation identity, even though the debate until
  now has focused almost exclusively on straight versus gay behaviors. Stated
  another way, minority men are avoided by white daters, regardless of their sexual
  identity, while minority women fare considerably better.
  Discussion and Conclusion
  Returning to the motivating question of this analysis, when white same-sex d
                                                                             ­ aters
  are privy to a large dating market, do they behave more race inclusively than

                                                       The Economy of Race among Daters 19
different-sex daters? The answer, as it turns out, is that it is highly dependent on
the gender of the projected dater. Previous work suggesting that non-straight
individuals are more race open than straight individuals used data that obscures
gender, either by relying on couple-level data (Schwartz and Graf 2009) without
examining behaviors of any specific racial group or by using data that does not
distinguish lesbians from gay men (Tsunokai, Kposowa, and Adams 2009; Phua
and Kaufman 2003). Our findings suggest that straight men and women differ
significantly, and that more race-open preferences held by heterosexual men are
                                                                                             Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
similar to lesbians, while gay men’s less race-open preferences are more similar to
heterosexual women. The general pattern for inter-group interaction is that all
four white groups are most likely to contact or respond to same-race daters;
however, when interactions do occur with non-white daters, it happens most
often among straight white men, second most often among white lesbians, third
most often with gay white men, and least often with straight white women.
Although same-sex users on this site still face a relatively smaller dating market
than straights do in an online context, we find that gays and lesbians behave very
differently from one another despite facing the same opportunity structure con-
straints. Gay men’s greater avoidance of minority daters on this site would seem
to indicate that market constraints might be the primary driving force for the
high exogamy rate among gay cohabiters in the Census data.
   In answer to the original question asking whether white same-sex daters are
more racially inclusive than their different-sex white counterparts, the presumed
progressive hypothesis, we conclude that the story is highly gendered. We tenta-
tively surmise that the explanation for greater interracial pairing differences in
the Census documented by Jepsen and Jepsen (2002) and Schwartz and Graf
(2009) is constrained dating markets for white gay men, but does not appear to
be the case for white lesbians. White lesbians exhibit more open interracial
boundaries than gay men in a more expansive online-dating-market setting. Per-
haps the most interesting finding to emerge in our analysis, however, is the polar-
ization among white heterosexual daters. While we started out asking if there was
a straight-nonstraight difference in racial preference behavior, analyses at the
individual level revealed that the gender of the potential partner is the more
salient distinction: minority men are less desired by white gay men and straight
women, while minority women suffer far less of a penalty from white lesbians
and straight men. Our findings suggest that it is more instructive to frame this
question in terms of the race and gender identity of the potential target date than
on the identity of the dater—and sexual orientation appears to have little to do
with it.
   There appears to be some process operating at the dyadic-interaction level
among heterosexuals that results in fewer interracial unions than might otherwise
be predicted by the more race-open behaviors among straight white men that we
document here. Do white straight women have a race-conservatizing effect on
straight men at the couple level? That is, if white straight women had similar
preferences as straight men, would there be higher rates of interracial unions in
the United States? Or is it that straight men are differently selective when it comes
to household partners instead of more casual dating partners at this very early
stage of potential relationship formation? Indeed, studies of heterosexual couples

20 Social Forces
  show evidence of a winnowing process, whereby interracial coupling is most
  common at initial stages of relationships and decline as relationships become
  more serious (Joyner and Kao 2005). We can’t speak to what the explanation
  may be in this paper, but we provide the first unique observation that homophily
  among straight whites may be highly dependent on dyadic–interaction level pro-
  cesses. Our unique data enable us to get a perspective on interracial interaction
  that raises new questions about the process of coupling.
     Historically, (straight) women’s lesser likelihood of outmarrying compared to
                                                                                       Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  (straight) men has been attributed to norms of patriarchal tradition where a
  woman’s social status is dependent upon her spouse’s social status (Root 2001;
  Spickard 1991). Accordingly, anti-miscegenation laws were gendered, more often
  policing the sexuality of white women than white men. Some of the original state
  formulations of such laws explicitly banned marriage between white women and
  nonwhite men, and those most often brought to court were marriages involving
  white women, not white men (Pascoe 1991). This vestigial dynamic may still
  undergird gendered differences today, in men’s and women’s in willingness to
  cross racial boundaries.
     But because the behaviors we document are more similar among straight
  men and lesbian women and among straight women and gay men, the explana-
  tion may center on the gender positionality of their respective partners. Norma-
  tive gender structures that operate conventionally for heterosexuals are
  sometimes reversed for this reason among the gay and lesbian community
  (Weinberg and Williams 2005; Kayzak 2010). Given the continuing gender and
  race gaps in income, it could be that straight women and gay men are more able
  to leverage race as a proxy for predicting a partner’s potential SES status. This
  calculus might be less relevant for straight men and lesbians seeking female
  partners, since women have lower earnings potential regardless of race (and the
  race gap in wages among women is much smaller than among men). Such an
  explanation has more salience for straight women and gay men when consider-
  ing potential male Latino and African American outpartners, but we note that
  it would not apply to Asian males. A recent study by Pew Hispanic (2013)
  showed that Asian-white couples had, by far, the highest household income of
  any other couple, same race or mixed race. Furthermore, modern changes in
  gender norms cast some doubt that this dynamic is still operating as strongly,
  with some studies even suggesting that women value physical appearance over
  earning potential the same as men (Eastwick and Finkel 2008; Luo and Zhang
  2009; McClintock 2014).
     Thus, we speculate that more cultural explanations are at play—explanations
  that have little to do with sexual orientation. Gendered racial formation theory
  asserts that societal notions of masculinity and femininity vary by race and eth-
  nicity (Collins 2004; Nemoto 2006, 2008). Minority men are often stereotyped
  as either threatening or unappealing, while minority women are often stereo-
  typed as sexually available and exotic. For example, the literature exposes depic-
  tions of black men as dangerously hyper-masculine and Asian men as effeminate.
  In contrast, Asian women are depicted as submissive and sexually appealing, and
  minority women are generally stereotyped as hyper-sexualized and exotic. All of
  these stereotypes, as distasteful and potentially harmful they are, may have

                                                            The Economy of Race among Daters 21
opposing effects in their impact on partner choices. In contrast to minority men,
who are avoided by white straight women and gay men, minority women may be
considered comparatively less threatening and more appealing than their male
minority counterparts. Thus, sexual orientation of daters may have little to do
with how racial hierarchies play out in the dating market; instead, whether a
minority dater is male or female may be the determining factor of how they are
seen by whites of all sexual orientations.
   Future research should investigate whether race is being used as a proxy for
                                                                                                  Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
SES by bringing in a comparison between daters who seek relationships (the
sample analyzed in this paper) versus those who seek casual sex only. If race is
being used by gay men and straight women daters to proxy for SES, presum-
ably short-term liaisons will be less subject to racial boundaries. The present
study could also be improved upon by adjudicating the role of omitted-vari-
able bias in online interaction studies. One possibility is for a dating website
company to code up the messaging and profile essay content, as well as the
visual photographic data, prior to anonymizing and releasing the data to
researchers.
   It is notable that Census studies documenting greater interracial exogamy
among gay and lesbian households rarely examine the specific racial composi-
tion of these couples. But a recent report suggests that same-sex minority house-
holds are more exogamous than same-sex white households (Kastanis and
Wilson 2014). Perhaps it is minority gay and lesbian householding behavior
that is driving the overall Census pattern shown in Schwartz and Graf (2009)
and Jepsen and Jepsen (2002). There is some evidence that black, Latino, and
Asian minority communities in the United States tend to be more socially con-
servative as a result of conservative religious and recent immigration histories.
As such, minority gays and lesbians often report greater challenges in reconcil-
ing their ethnic and sexual identities, due to alienation from their ethnic com-
munities (Greene 1997; ­Manalansan 1996; Dube and Savin-Williams 1999;
Chan 1989; Collins 2004; Sherkat, De Vries, and Creek 2010; although see
Moore 2010). Thus, it is possible that gay and lesbian minorities, even more so
than their white counterparts, face a more constrained same-race dating mar-
ket. Therefore, future studies with large enough samples should extend similar
analysis to the behavior of non-white daters specifically to examine whether
our findings are generalizable to all sexual minorities or primarily to gay and
lesbian whites.
Notes
1.	 Due to coverage error, census editing procedures and inconsistent reporting are due
    to regional variation in same-sex marriage policy, Census data on same-sex couples
    are likely to be inaccurate (Cohn 2011; O’Connell and Feliz 2011).
2.	 Constrained markets and racial preferences are not necessarily mutually exclusive
    explanations for same-sex interracial cohabitation patterns. Greater exposure to
    racial diversity is associated with positive changes in interracial attitudes and behav-
    iors (Emerson et al. 2002; Sigelman and Welch 1993).
3.	 Due to an identity restriction clause in our contract with the dating site company, we
    are unable to name the data source.

22 Social Forces
  4.	 Our preliminary data analyses find less fluidity than expected in bisexual messaging
       behaviors; the majority sent messages consistently to only one sex or the other. This
       may reflect closeted identities among gays and lesbians and/or a novel way for indi-
       viduals to present themselves on the online market. We thus exclude bisexuals from
       the present analysis and focus on better understanding how bisexual self-identity may
       vary across daters in another paper.
  5.	 The advantage to the GEE approach is its ability to address dependency among obser-
       vations and optimize the statistical power of the correlated data by estimating clus-
       tered correlations. In contrast to mixed effects or hierarchical models, GEE makes
                                                                                                  Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
       little demand of within-cluster variance and is more suitable to our data, where a
       significant number of our observations are singletons and where user participation
       follows a power-law distribution. The exclusion of singletons would create serious
       selection bias, making a random intercept approach unsuitable for our analysis. In
       contrast to other, more network-oriented approaches, GEE requires less computing
       power and thus handles a much larger population. The drawback is that we must
       assume a correlation within each sender/responder but not within the other side.
       However, considering that each individual will have different evaluations of the
       unmeasured factors of the same individual and there is little network transitivity in
       the relation of interest (two alters of the same ego do not attract each other in our
       case), the GEE procedure is the best-suited approach.
  6.	 In order to gauge the probability of sending an e-mail to someone, we must simultane-
       ously take into account all of the people whom someone could have messaged but did
       not. Because the possibilities number in the hundreds of thousands, taking all of them
       into account is computationally untenable. Thus, for our sending analysis, we ran-
       domly sample 300 white users by sexual identity, gender, and from each metropolitan
       area who joined the website in the same year. We construct the opportunity space as
       such: say there are n partners of racial group i and sexual identity g and m partners
       of racial group j and sexual identity h in a given metropolitan area. Presumably, each
       partner can send m initial messages, and so the total number of potential combina-
       tions of initial messages from a person of group i to a person of group j is n x m.
       Among these dyads, we exclude any cases where the account lifetime of the potential
       sender did not overlap with that of the potential receiver. We also exclude the cases
       where the potential receiver is younger or older than the potential sender’s default age
       range. We calculate the overlap between two users for each dyad as a measure of
       exposure.
  7.	 This is determined by the answers to the personality questions on the website, which
       is shown to both users as an indicator of compatibility.
  8.	 See for example http://www.sparkology.com/blog/tag/online-dating-etiquette/ and
       http://www.match.com/cp.aspx?cpp=/cppp/magazine/article0.html&articleid=6171.
  9.	 While Indians are conventionally categorized as Asian, we treat them here as an inde-
       pendent ethnic group and they are not included in the Asian category in this analysis.
  10.	 Other data have shown that more gay-identified individuals than straights identify as
       non-white (Easton 2008; Barrios and Lundquist 2012).
  11.	 We conducted three sensitivity tests around these respondents and determined that
       their missing ethnic identity more reflects tendency in reporting behavior than con-
       scious omission. First, we had a group of undergraduates systematically code through
       photographs for respondents who left their race missing. In a sample of 150 profiles,
       no systematic pattern emerged where people of one particular ethnicity were any
       more or less represented. Second, we conducted factor and logistic analyses predicting
       the correlates of missing on race and found that being missing on height, on educa-
       tion, on smoking behavior, and on drinking behaviors correctly predicted being

                                                             The Economy of Race among Daters 23
     ­missing on race 93 percent of the time. Third, as table 1 indicates, racially undeclared
     daters receive among the fewest e-mails, indicating that other daters dismiss them as
     illegitimate or less engaged prospects because their profile is incomplete on other
     important factors as well.
12.	 Since Hispanic is often conceptualized as an ethnic rather than a racial category, those
      who are conventionally counted as Hispanic might identify with both Hispanic and
      white on the website. Our analysis shows that such inclusion would add two addi-
      tional percentage points for the Hispanic population.
13.	 Our ongoing analysis of biracial groups shows that users who identify as white-Asian,
                                                                                                   Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
      white-Hispanic, and white–Native American behave similarly to those who identify
      only as white and do not show particular preference to users of their minority iden-
      tity. However, those who identify as white-black show preference to both users who
      identify as white only and those who identify as black only.
14.	 Though Hispanic is officially defined as an ethnic rather than a racial category, we
      believe it is analytically meaningful to juxtapose it with Asian, black, and white as a
      distinct racial group. This is not only because Hispanics, along with Asians, are often
      considered as occupying the racial middle (Bonilla-Silva 2004), but also because
     scholars argue that the Hispanic population has been increasingly racialized in the
     past decades (Massey 2007).
15.	 US Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2010 Annual Social and Economic
      Supplement: Table 3. Detailed Years of School Completed by People 25 Years and
      over by Sex, Age Groups, Race, and Hispanic Origin: 2010 (http://www.census.gov/
      hhes/socdemo/education/data/cps/2010/tables.html).
16.	 http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/bodymeas.htm.
17.	 In analyses not shown here, we ran the same analysis for the entire sample of all
      race daters to gauge whether in-group/out-group messaging was similar when not
      limited to white daters as the in-group. This also more closely approximates exist-
      ing same-sex Census studies, which generically assess in-group/out-group pairings
      without regard to specific racial groups. Not surprisingly, since our data are also
      disproportionately weighted toward whites, the results were little different from
      those shown in figure 2 (and appendix 1A). The pattern was unchanged, with
     straight men of all races most likely to interact with out-group daters, followed by
     lesbians, and with gay men and straight women least inclined to send and respond
     to out-group daters.
18.	 Note the slightly differing range shown on the x-axis between the sending and
     responding models. Because this paper examines intergroup differences, we chose
     to visually focus on this point rather than on the (equally interesting) overall trends
     in responding and sending, which is treated in another paper (Lin and Lundquist
     2013).
About the Authors
 Jennifer Lundquist is a social demographer and Associate Dean at the College
 of Social and Behavioral Sciences, University of Massachusetts–Amherst. Her
 research examines the processes through which racial, ethnic, and gender
 inequalities are perpetuated and sometimes undone in institutional settings,
 such as the workplace, the dating/marriage market, and families. Her recent
 work has appeared in the American Sociological Review, Journal of Marriage
 and the Family, Maternal and Child Health, and American Journal of
­Sociology.

24 Social Forces
     Ken-Hou Lin is an Assistant Professor of Sociology and Faculty Research Asso-
  ciate of the Population Research Center at the University of Texas–Austin. His
  interests include inequality, finance, organization, race, and quantitative methods.
  His work has appeared in the American Journal of Sociology, American Sociologi-
  cal Review, North Carolina Banking Institute Journal, and Social Science Research.
  References
                                                                                                                  Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  Allison, P. D. 1999. “Comparing Logit and Probit Coefficients across Groups.” Sociological Methods &
      Research 28(2):186–208.
  Armstrong, E. 2003. Forging Gay Identities: Organizing Sexuality in San Francisco, 1950–1994. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.
  Barrios, R., and J. H. Lundquist. 2012. “Boys Just Want to Have Fun? Sexual Behaviors and Romantic Inten-
      tions of Gay and Straight Males in College.” Journal of LGBT Youth 29:271–96.
  Beeker, C., J. M. Kraft, J. L. Peterson, and J. P. Stokes. 1998. “Influences on Sexual Risk Behavior in Young
      African American Men Who Have Sex with Men.” Journal of the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association
      2:59–67.
  Bellou, Andriana. 2013. “Diffusion on Marriage Rates: Evidence from the Broadband Market.” IZA Discus-
      sion Paper No. 7316. http://ftp.iza.org/dp7316.pdf.
  Bonilla-Silva, E. 2004. “From Bi-Racial to Tri-Racial: Towards a New System of Racial Stratification in the
      USA.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 27(6):931–50.
  Boykin, K. 1996. One More River to Cross. New York: Anchor.
  Chan, C. 1989. “Issues of Identity Development among Asian American Lesbians and Gay Men.” Journal of
      Counseling and Development 68:16–20.
  Chasin, A. 2000. “Selling Out: The Gay and Lesbian Movement Goes to Market.” New York: St. Martin’s Press.
  Cohn, D. 2011. “How Accurate Are Counts of Same-Sex Couples?” http://www.pewsocialtrends.
      org/2011/08/25/how-accurate-are-counts-of-same-sex-couples.
  Collins, P. 2004. Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender, and the New Racism. New York:
      ­Routledge.
  Connell, R. 1992. “A Very Straight Gay: Masculinity, Homosexual Experience and the Dynamics of Gender.”
      American Sociological Review 57(6):735–51.
  Cook, T. 2014. “Tim Cook Speaks Up.” Businessweek, October 30. http://www.businessweek.com/­
       articles/2014-10-30/tim-cook-im-proud-to-be-gay.
  Cross, S., and L. Madson. 1997. “Models of the Self: Self-Construals and Gender.” Psychological Bulletin
       122:5–37.
  Deaux, K., and R. Hanna. 1984. “Courtship in the Personals Column: The Influence of Gender and Sexual
       Orientation.” Sex Roles 11:363–75.
  Dube, E. M., and R. C. Savin-Williams. 1999. “Sexual Identity Development among Ethnic Sexual-Minority
       Male Youths.” Developmental Psychology 35(6):1389–1398.
  Easton, A., K. Jackson, P. Mowery, D. Comeau, and R. Sell. 2008. “Adolescent same-sex and both-sex
       romantic attractions and relationships: Implications for smoking” American Journal of Public Health
       98(3):462–67.
  Eastwick, P. W., and E. J. Finkel. 2008. “Sex Differences in Mate Preferences Revisited: Do People Know
       What They Initially Desire in a Romantic Partner?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
       94:245–64.
  Ellingson, S., E. O. Laumann, A. Paik, and J. Mahay. 2004. The theory of sex markets. The sexual organiza-
       tion of the city, 3–39.
  Emerson, Michael O., Rachel Tolbert Kimbro, and George Yancey. 2002. “Contact Theory Extended: The
       Effects of Prior Racial Contact on Current Social Ties.” Social Science Quarterly 83(3):745–61.

                                                                       The Economy of Race among Daters 25
Feliciano, C., R. Lee, and B. Robnett. 2011. “Racial Boundaries among Latinos: Evidence from Internet
    ­Daters’ Racial Preferences.” Social Problems 58:189–212.
Fisman, R., S. Iyengar, E. Kamenica, and I. Simonson. 2006. “Gender Differences in Mate Selection: ­Evidence
     from a Speed Dating Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121:673–97.
Froyum, C. M. 2007. “‘At Least I’m Not Gay’: Heterosexual Identity Making among Poor Black Teens.”
     ­Sexualities 10(5):603–22.
Gates, G. 2012. “Same-Sex Couples in Census 2010: Race and Ethnicity.” Williams Institute, UCLA School
      of Law, April.
Goode, E. 1996. “Gender and Courtship Entitlement: Responses to Personal Ads.” Sex Roles 34:141–69.
                                                                                                                Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
Green, A. 2008. “Erotic Habitus: Towards a Sociology of Desire.” Theoretical Sociology 37:597–626.
Greene, B., ed. 1997. Ethnic Minority Lesbians and Gay Men: Mental Health and Treatment Issues. ­Thousand
      Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hanley, J. A., A. Negassa, M. Edwardes, and J. E. Forrester. 2003. “Statistical Analysis of Correlated Data
      Using Generalized Estimating Equations: An Orientation.” American Journal of Epidemiology
    157(4):364–75.
Hitsch, G., A. Hortaçsu, and D. Ariely. 2010. “What Makes You Click? Mate Preferences in Online Dating.”
    Quantitative Marketing and Economics 8(4):393–427.
Jepsen, L. K., and C. A. Jepsen. 2002. “An Empirical Analysis of the Matching Patterns of Same-Sex and
    Opposite-Sex Couples.” Demography 39(3):435–53.
Johnson, M. K., and M. M. Marini. 1998. “Bridging the Racial Divide in the United States: The Effect of
    Gender.” Social Psychology Quarterly 61(3):247–58.
Joyner, K., and G. Kao. 2005. “Interracial Relationships and the Transition to Adulthood.” American Socio-
    logical Review 70:563–81.
Kastanis, A., and B. Wilson. 2014. Race/Ethnicity, Gender and Socioeconomic Wellbeing of Individuals in
    Same-Sex Couples. Los Angeles, California: Williams Institute.
Kazyak, E. 2010. The Space and Place of Sexuality: How Rural Lesbians and Gays Narrate Identity. Dissertation
    The University of Michigan.
Kennedy, E. L., and M. D. Davis. 1993. Boots of Leather, Slippers of Gold: The History of a Lesbian Commu-
    nity. New York: Routledge.
Kurdek, L. A. 1993. “The Allocation of Household Labor in Homosexual and Heterosexual Cohabiting
      ­Couples.” Journal of Social Issues 49:127–39.
______. 2003. “Differences between Gay and Lesbian Cohabiting Couples.” Journal of Social and Personal
    Relationships 20:411–36.
______. 2004. “Are Gay and Lesbian Cohabiting Couples Really Different from Heterosexual Married
    Couples?” Journal of Marriage and Family 66:880–900.
Lewis, K. 2013. “The Limits of Racial Prejudice.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
    110(47):18814–18819.
Li, Norman P., J. Michael Bailey, Douglas T. Kenrick, and Joan A. W. Linsenmeier. 2002. “The Necessities
    and Luxuries of Mate Preferences: Testing the Tradeoffs.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
    82(6):947–55.
Li, Norman P., and Douglas T. Kenrick. 2006. “Sex Similarities and Differences in Preferences for
    Short-Term Mates: What, Whether, and Why.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
    90(3):468–89.
Lin, K., and J. H. Lundquist. 2013. “Mate Selection in Cyberspace: The Intersection of Race, Gender, and
    Education” American Journal of Sociology 119(1):183–215.
Logan, T. 2010. “Personal Characteristics, Sexual Behaviors, and Male Sex Work: A Quantitative Approach.”
    American Sociological Review 75(5):679–704.
Luo, Shanhong, and Guangjian Zhang. 2009. “What Leads to Romantic Attraction: Similarity, Reciprocity,
    Security, or Beauty? Evidence from a Speed-Dating Study.” Journal of Personality 77(4):933–63.

26 Social Forces
  Madden, M., and A. Lenhart. 2006. “Online Dating.” Pew Internet and American Life Project. http://www.
     pewinternet.org/Reports/2006/Online-Dating.aspx.
  Manalansan, M. F. 1996. “Double Minorities: Latino, Black, and Asian Men Who Have Sex with Men.”
     In The Lives of Lesbians, Gays, and Bisexuals: Children to Adults, edited by Savin-Williams, R. C., and
     K. M. Cohen, 393–415. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.
  Massey, D. S. 2007. Categorically Unequal: The American Stratification System. New York: Russell Sage
     Foundation.
  McClintock, Elizabeth Aura. 2014. “Beauty and Status: The Illusion of Exchange in Partner Selection.”
     American Sociological Review 79(4):575–604.
                                                                                                                 Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
  Meier, A., K. E. Hull, and T. A. Ortyl. 2009. “Young Adult Relationship Values at the Intersection of Gender
     and Sexuality.” Journal of Marriage and Family 71(3):510–25.
  Mood, C. 2010. “Logistic Regression: Why We Cannot Do What We Think We Can Do, and What We Can
     Do about It.” European Sociological Review 26(1):67–82.
  O’Connell, Martin, and Sarah Feliz. 2011. “Same-Sex Couple Household Statistics from the 2010 Census.”
     SEHSD Working Paper No. 2011-26.
  Pew Research Center. 2013. “A Survey of LGBT Americans: Attitudes, Experiences and Values in Changing
     Times.” PewSocialTrends.org.
  Phua, V. C., and G. Kaufman. 2003. “The Crossroads of Race and Sexuality.” Journal of Family Issues
     24(8):981.
  Reid-Pharr, R. 2001. Black Gay Man. New York: New York University Press.
  Robnett, B., and C. Feliciano. 2011. “Patterns of Racial-Ethnic Exclusion by Internet Daters.” Social Forces
     89(3):807–28.
  Root, Maria. 2001. Love‘s Revolution: Interracial Marriage. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
  Rosenfeld, M., and B. S. Kim. 2005. “The Independence of Young Adults and the Rise of Interracial and
     Same-Sex Unions.” American Sociological Review 70(4):541–62.
  Rosenfeld, M. J., and R. J. Thomas. 2012. “Searching for a Mate: The Rise of the Internet as a Social Inter-
     mediary.” American Sociological Review 77(4):523–47.
  Sautter, J. M., R. M. Tippett, and S. P. Morgan. 2010. “The Social Demography of Internet Dating in the
     United States.” Social Science Quarterly 91(2):554–75.
  Schwartz, C. R., and N. L. Graf. 2009. “Assortative Matching among Same-Sex and Different Sex Couples
     in the United States, 1990–2000.” Demographic Research 21:843–78.
  Sherkat, D. E., K. M. De Vries, and S. Creek. 2010. “Race, Religion, and Opposition to Same-Sex Marriage.”
     Social Science Quarterly 91:80–98.
  Sigelman, L. and S. Welch. (1993). The contact hypothesis revisited: black-white interaction and positive
     racial attitudes, Social Forces 71:781–95.
  South, S. J. 1991. “Sociodemographic Differentials in Mate Selection Preferences.” Journal of Marriage
     and the Family 53:928–40.
  Spickard, Paul R. 1991. Mixed Blood: Intermarriage and Ethnic Identity in Twentieth-Century America.
     Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
  Stacey, J. 2011. Unhitched: Love, Marriage and Family Values from West Hollywood to Western China. New
     York: New York University Press.
  Stokes, J. P., and J. L. Peterson. 1998. “Homophobia, Self-Esteem, and Risk for HIV among African American
     Men Who Have Sex with Men. AIDS Education and Prevention 10:278–92.
  Tsunokai, G. T., A. J. Kposowa, and M. A. Adams. 2009. “Racial Preferences in Internet Dating: A Compari-
     son of Four Birth Cohorts.” Western Journal of Black Studies 33(1):1–15.
  US Census. 2010. “America’s Families and Living Arrangements,” table FG-4. http://www.census.gov/
     population/www/socdemo/hh-fam/cps2010.html.
  Weinberg, Martin S., and Colin J. Williams. 2005. “Fecal Matters: Habitus, Embodiments, and Deviance.”
     Social Problems, August.

                                                                          The Economy of Race among Daters 27
 Weisshaar, K. 2014. “Earnings Equality and Relationship Stability for Same-Sex and Heterosexual Couples.”
     Social Forces.
 Wilkins, A. C. 2008. “Wannabes, Goths, and Christians: The Boundaries of Sex, Style, and Status.” Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.
 Wilson, P. A., P. Valera, A. Ventuneac, I. Balan, M. Rowe, and A. Carballo-Diéguez. 2009. “Race-Based
     Sexual Stereotyping and Sexual Partnering among Men Who Use the Internet to Identify Other Men for
     Bareback Sex.” Journal of Sex Research 46(5):399–413.
 Zickuhr, K., and A. Smith. 2012. Pew Research Center. http://pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/2012/
     PIP_Digital_differences_041312.pdf.
                                                                                                                    Downloaded from http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/ at Univ. of Massachusetts/Amherst Library on March 17, 2015
 Zuur, A. F., E. N. Ieno, N. Walker, A. A. Saveliev, and G. M. Smith. 2009. Mixed Effects Models and E­ xtensions
     in Ecology with R, 1st ed. New York: Springer Press.
All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate, letting you access and r

