                            NIH Public Access
                            Author Manuscript
                            Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.
                           Published in final edited form as:
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                            Arch Sex Behav. 2012 June ; 41(3): 649–657. doi:10.1007/s10508-011-9768-7.
                           Measurement of Sexual Identity in Surveys: Implications for
                           Substance Abuse Research
                           Sean Esteban McCabe,
                           Institute for Research on Women and Gender, University of Michigan, 204 S. State St., Ann
                           Arbor, MI 48109-1290, USA; Substance Abuse Research Center, University of Michigan, Ann
                           Arbor, MI, USA
                           Tonda L. Hughes,
                           Mental Health and Administrative Nursing, Department of Public Health, University of Illinois at
                           Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
                           Wendy Bostwick,
                           Public Health and Health Education Programs, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, USA
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                           Michele Morales, and
                           Substance Abuse Research Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
                           Carol J. Boyd
                           Institute for Research on Women and Gender, University of Michigan, 204 S. State St., Ann
                           Arbor, MI 48109-1290, USA; Substance Abuse Research Center, University of Michigan, Ann
                           Arbor, MI, USA; School of Nursing, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Women's
                           Studies, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
                           Sean Esteban McCabe: plius@umich.edu
                           Abstract
                               Researchers are increasingly recognizing the need to include measures of sexual orientation in
                               health studies. However, relatively little attention has been paid to how sexual identity, the
                               cognitive aspect of sexual orientation, is defined and measured. Our study examined the impact of
                               using two separate sexual identity question formats: a three-category question (response options
                               included heterosexual, bisexual, or lesbian/gay), and a similar question with five response options
                               (only lesbian/gay, mostly lesbian/gay, bisexual, mostly heterosexual, only heterosexual). A large
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                               probability-based sample of undergraduate university students was surveyed and a randomly
                               selected sub-sample of participants was asked both sexual identity questions. Approximately one-
                               third of students who identified as bisexual based on the three-category sexual identity measure
                               chose “mostly heterosexual” or “mostly lesbian/gay” on the five-category measure. In addition to
                               comparing sample proportions of lesbian/gay, bisexual, or heterosexual participants based on the
                               two question formats, rates of alcohol and other drug use were also examined among the
                               participants. Substance use outcomes among the sexual minority subgroups differed based on the
                               sexual identity question format used: bisexual participants showed greater risk of substance use in
                               analyses using the three-category measure whereas “mostly heterosexual” participants were at
                               greater risk when data were analyzed using the five-category measure. Study results have
                               important implications for the study of sexual identity, as well as whether and how to recode
                               responses to questions related to sexual identity.
                           © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
                           Correspondence to: Sean Esteban McCabe, plius@umich.edu.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                              Page 2
                              Keywords
                                   Sexual orientation; Sexual identity; Substance use; College students
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                              Introduction
                                             Researchers increasingly consider sexual orientation an important focus of health research
                                             and a valuable demographic variable for inclusion in studies of health (e.g., Case et al.,
                                             2004; Omoto & Kurtzman, 2005; Meyer, 2003; Sell & Becker, 2001). Like race/ethnicity or
                                             socioeconomic status, sexual orientation is a complex construct that contains dimensions
                                             that are difficult to measure. Sexual orientation is most commonly described as including
                                             cognitive (identity), behavioral, and affective (attraction or desire) dimensions (Laumann,
                                             Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels, 1994). Although measurement of sexual behavior is
                                             relatively straightforward, sexual identity is conceptually and operationally more difficult to
                                             define. Adolescent participants report the highest burden when answering questions about
                                             sexual identity compared with questions related to sexual behavior (Austin, Conron, Patel, &
                                             Freedner, 2007). Given that sexual identity is among the most commonly assessed
                                             dimensions of sexual orientation, it is important to examine and contrast various measures
                                             used to assess sexual identity.
                                             Health-related research has used a wide array of measures to assess sexual identity (e.g.,
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                             Friedman et al., 2004; Sell, 1997; Solarz, 1999). Commonly used sexual identity measures
                                             include five- or seven-category scales that conceptualize sexual identity as a continuum
                                             ranging from “exclusively homosexual” to “exclusively heterosexual” (e.g., Debord, Wood,
                                             Sher, & Good, 1998; Hughes, Wilsnack, & Johnson, 2005; Laumann et al., 1994; Matthews,
                                             Hughes, Johnson, Razzano, & Cassidy, 2002) and discrete three-category measures
                                             consisting of responses such as heterosexual, bisexual or lesbian/gay (e.g., Bontempo &
                                             D'Augelli, 2002; Drabble, Midanik, & Trocki, 2005; Garofalo, Wolf, Kessel, Palfrey, &
                                             DuRant, 1998; Jorm, Korten, Rodgers, Jacomb, & Christensen, 2002; McCabe, Boyd &
                                             Hughes, & d'Arcy, 2003). Some sexual identity measures also include other responses such
                                             as “don't know”(Jorm et al., 2002), “not sure”(Bontempo & D'Augelli, 2002; Garofalo et al.,
                                             1998), “refused”(McCabe et al., 2003),“none of the above”(Bontempo & D'Augelli, 2002;
                                             Garofalo et al., 1998), “curious,” “questioning,” “unlabeled” (Thompson & Morgan, 2008)
                                             or “other (specify)”(McCabe, Hughes, Bostwick, & Boyd, 2005). Such studies focusing on
                                             sexual identity often utilize inconsistent response options and recoding practices which can
                                             lead to the misclassification of sexual minorities and present challenges to comparing results
                                             across studies. Despite these variations in measurement, little research has examined using
                                             one sexual identity measure versus another in terms of response decisions and distribution of
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                             sexual orientation.
                                             A growing body of research suggests that sexual minority populations are at heightened risk
                                             for substance use, abuse, and dependence relative to their heterosexual counterparts
                                             (Cochran, Ackerman, Mays, & Ross, 2004; Drabble et al., 2005; Hughes et al., 2005;
                                             McCabe, Hughes, Bostwick, West, & Boyd, 2009; Wilsnack et al., 2008). In addition, recent
                                             research suggests that risk varies among sexual minority groups. For example, some studies
                                             have found that bisexuals have poorer mental health than lesbians and gay men (e.g.,
                                             Bostwick, Boyd, Hughes, & McCabe, 2010; Eisenberg & Wechsler, 2003; Jorm et al., 2002;
                                             McCabe et al., 2009).
                                             The majority of college-based studies that have examined the relationship between sexual
                                             identity and substance use have asked participants to label themselves as bisexual, lesbian/
                                             gay or heterosexual (e.g., Boyd, McCabe, & d'Arcy, 2003; McCabe et al., 2003; McCabe,
                                                 Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                               Page 3
                                             Hughes, & Boyd, 2004). However, there is evidence that adolescents and young adults
                                             prefer intermediate options, such as “mostly heterosexual” or “mostly homosexual” to
                                             describe their sexual identity rather than labels which imply a static state such as “bisexual”
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                             or “lesbian/gay” (Austin et al., 2007). Findings from college-based and non-college based
                                             samples indicate that health-related outcomes and rates of health behaviors can vary based
                                             on the dimension of sexual orientation assessed (e.g., Bontempo & D'Augelli, 2002;
                                             Bostwick et al., 2010; McCabe et al., 2009; Russell, Driscoll, & Truong, 2002; Scheer et al.,
                                             2003). Furthermore, at least two college-based studies have shown gay and bisexual men
                                             were at lower risk for binge drinking than their heterosexual peers but the results of these
                                             studies varied based on whether sexual orientation was measured using a five-category
                                             Likert-scale or a discrete three-category measure (Eisenberg & Wechsler, 2003; McCabe et
                                             al., 2003, 2005). Based on results of a qualitative study using cognitive processing
                                             interviews, Austin et al. (2007) concluded that more research is needed to assess the
                                             performance of various sexual identity measures, particularly among adolescents.
                                             Building on our previous work on substance use and sexual orientation, we designed a
                                             randomized study to compare two measures commonly used to assess sexual identity among
                                             adolescents and young adults. The primary objectives of the study were to (1) compare
                                             sample proportions of lesbian/gay, bisexual, or heterosexual participants based on the two
                                             question formats (three-category vs. five-category) and (2) compare the prevalence of
                                             alcohol and other drug use among those participants based on the two sexual identity
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                             question formats.
                              Method
                              Participants
                                             Table 1 summarizes demographic characteristics of study participants who were asked both
                                             sexual identity questions and did not refuse or reply with some other response to either of
                                             the questions (n = 2,077). The demographic characteristics of this group were compared to
                                             those of the university's overall student population. The proportion of women was higher in
                                             the sample than the university's overall student population (58% vs. 51%), but otherwise the
                                             demographic characteristics of the sample closely resembled the population of full-time
                                             undergraduate students attending the university. For example, in both the sample and the
                                             overall population, approximately two out of three students were White, 13% were Asian,
                                             and three out of four students lived within one mile of the main campus. Table 1 summarizes
                                             the gender, race/ethnicity, and class year of the sample based on the two sexual identity
                                             measures (three-category vs. five-category) among participants who were asked both sexual
                                             identity questions.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                              Procedure
                                             In 2003, a simple random sample of 19,378 full-time undergraduate students was drawn
                                             from the Registrar's Office at a large midwestern research university following institutional
                                             review board approval. The entire sample was sent an e-mail message describing the Student
                                             Life Survey (SLS) and inviting them to participate by clicking on a link and using a unique
                                             password to access the Web-based survey. All participants were informed that a research
                                             firm unaffiliated with the university was contracted to format the Web-based survey as well
                                             as store and maintain data, and that university officials, faculty, and staff were unable to
                                             access any contact information connected with the participants. Data were collected during a
                                             one-month period in March and April 2003. The Web-based survey was maintained on a
                                             hosted secure Web site running under the secure sockets layer protocol to insure that data
                                             were safely transmitted between the participant's browser and the server. Information sent to
                                             students in the sample explained the study, emphasized that participation was voluntary, and
                                                 Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                            Page 4
                                           confirmed that responses would be kept confidential. Non-participants were sent up to three
                                           reminder e-mail messages. Students who participated in the study were eligible for a
                                           sweepstakes that included several cash prizes. The response rate was 47%, which is
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           consistent with national alcohol and other drug studies of 4-year colleges and universities
                                           (e.g., Wechsler et al., 2002). The entire sample was asked a five-category question about
                                           their sexual identity and one-fourth of the sample was randomly selected to receive an
                                           additional three-category sexual identity question earlier in the survey. This study focuses on
                                           the sub-sample of participants who were asked both sexual identity questions.
                              Measures
                                           The 2003 SLS was developed and pilot tested in 1993, and contained several substance use
                                           measures, including several items from the Monitoring the Future Study (Johnston,
                                           O'Malley, & Bachman, 2001), the CORE Survey (Presley, Meilman, & Cashin, 1996), and
                                           the College Alcohol Study (Wechsler et al., 2002). The 2003 SLS used sexual orientation
                                           measures adapted from the Chicago Health and Life Experiences of Women Study (e.g.,
                                           Hughes, 2003; Hughes, Johnson, & Wilsnack, 2001).
                                           Sexual identity was measured using the following five-category question: “How would you
                                           define your sexual identity? Would you say that you are… (1) only lesbian/gay, (2) mostly
                                           lesbian/gay, (3) bisexual, (4) mostly heterosexual, (5) only heterosexual, (6) other (specify)
                                           or (7) refused.” In addition, one-fourth of the sample was randomly assigned to receive a
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           three-category sexual identity question earlier in the survey: “With respect to your sexual
                                           identity, would you say you are… (1) heterosexual, (2) lesbian/gay, (3) bisexual or (4)
                                           refused.” The three-category sexual identity question appeared as Question 14 and the five-
                                           category sexual identity question appeared as Question 92 in the survey. Because
                                           participants who answered the three-category sexual identity question did so before
                                           answering the five-category question, we considered the possibility that responses to the
                                           second question might have been influenced by question order. However, comparisons using
                                           a chi-square test of homogeneity indicated no statistically significant differences in the
                                           distributions of responses to the five-category question between those who only were asked
                                           the five category question and those who were asked both the three and the five category
                                           questions (χ2 = 3.6, df=4). Participants indicating “other” or “refused” were dropped from
                                           analyses.
                                           The SLS also included standard measures of substance use, such as cigarette smoking
                                           (Johnston et al., 2001), binge drinking (Wechsler, Dowdall, Davenport, & Rimm, 1995), and
                                           marijuana and other drug use (Johnston et al., 2001). Cigarette use was measured using the
                                           following question: “How many cigarettes did you smoke during the past 30 days ?” The
                                           response categories were: (1) none, (2) less than 1 cigarette per day, (3) 1–5 cigarettes per
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           day, (4) about ½ pack per day, (5) about 1 pack per day, (6) about 1½ packs per day, and (7)
                                           2 or more packs per day.
                                           Heavy episodic drinking was measured using the following single item question: “Over the
                                           past 2 weeks, on how many occasions have you had five or more drinks in a row (four or
                                           more for women)?”A drink was defined as a glass of wine, a bottle of beer or wine cooler, a
                                           shot glass of liquor, or a mixed drink. The response scale was (1) none, (2) once, (3) twice,
                                           (4) 3–5 occasions,(5) 6–9 occasions, and (6) 10 or more occasions (Wechsler et al., 1995).
                                           Marijuana use was measured using the following question: “On how many occasions in the
                                           past 12 months have you used marijuana or hashish?” The response scale was: (1) no
                                           occasions, (2) 1–2 occasions, (3) 3–5 occasions, (4) 6–9 occasions, (5) 10–19 occasions, (6)
                                           20-39 occasions, and (7) 40 or more occasions (Johnston et al., 2001). We created an other
                                           illicit drug use variable by summing the total number of illicit drugs used in the past year
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                            Page 5
                                           (other than marijuana), including cocaine in any form, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD),
                                           other psychedelics, amphetamines, crystal methamphetamine, heroin, inhalants, ecstasy,
                                           gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and flunitrazepam (Rohypnol).
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                              Data Analysis
                                           Data analysis focused on participants who received both sexual identity questions. First, we
                                           examined the associations between sexual identity as measured by each question type and
                                           gender, race, and class year using chi-square tests of homogeneity. Next, we compared the
                                           prevalence of tobacco, alcohol, marijuana, and other illicit drug use among participants
                                           classified as lesbian, gay or bisexual based on the two questions using chi-square tests of
                                           homogeneity. Logistic regression models were used to examine the relationship between
                                           each sexual identity question and multiple measures of substance use, adjusting for sex,
                                           race, and class year. Ordinal outcome measures were collapsed to create dichotomous
                                           variables, such that “none” or “no occasions” were coded “0” and all other responses were
                                           coded “1”. For all logistic regression analyses, the largest category for each measure of
                                           sexual identity served as the reference group (i.e., “only heterosexual” for the five-category
                                           measure and “heterosexual” for the three-category measure).
                              Results
                              Distribution of Sexual Identity
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Tables 2 and 3 summarize distributions of sexual identity based on the three- and the five-
                                           category sexual identity questions by participants' sex. Among students who were asked
                                           both questions, discrepancies in classification occurred equally among the female and male
                                           students (0.9% for both). Both male and female participants who self-identified as “lesbian
                                           or gay” on the three-category measure chose either “only lesbian/gay” (54.3%, n = 19) or
                                           “mostly lesbian/gay” (45.7%, n = 16) on the five-category measure. A total of 116 female
                                           participants and 41 male participants who identified as heterosexual using the three-category
                                           format chose “mostly heterosexual” using the five-category format. In addition, half (50.0%)
                                           of the male students who chose the bisexual response option on the three-category measure
                                           selected a different response on the five-category measure such that the three-category
                                           question resulted in a greater number of male participants who self-identified as bisexual (n
                                           = 10) than the five-category question (n = 5). Finally, almost one-third (31.0%) of the
                                           female students who chose the bisexual response option on the three-category measure
                                           selected “mostly heterosexual” on the five-category measure and the remaining selected
                                           “bisexual”.
                              Sexual Identity Measures and Substance Use
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           In addition to examining the distribution of sexual identities, we investigated the impact of
                                           question format on the participants' reports of substance use separately by sex. As shown in
                                           Tables 4 and 5, although substance use was generally higher among lesbian/gay and
                                           bisexual students than heterosexual students regardless of question type, there were some
                                           notable differences in outcomes between the two questions. For example, using responses to
                                           the three-category question, rates of monthly cigarette smoking and past-year marijuana use
                                           were significantly higher among bisexual females compared with their heterosexual
                                           counterparts. However, when responses to the five-category question were compared, we
                                           found no such differences. Further, we found odds of binge drinking that were significantly
                                           lower for gay men than for heterosexual men in analyses using the three-category format but
                                           no significant differences in analyses that used the five-category measure.
                                           We conducted additional analyses and found that by collapsing mostly heterosexual and
                                           mostly lesbian/gay responses into the bisexual category, the odds of substance use were
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                            Page 6
                                           increased for both bisexual women and men. In contrast, when participants who endorsed
                                           the mostly categories were collapsed into the heterosexual or lesbian/gay categories (and not
                                           counted as bisexual), no significant sexual identity differences were found in substance use
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           (data not shown).
                              Discussion
                                           Findings from this study highlight some of the challenges faced by survey researchers in
                                           assessing sexual identity. Indeed, several studies contend that sexual identity is fluid and
                                           may be difficult to adequately measure using traditional survey questions that treat sexual
                                           identity as static (e.g., Diamond, 2008; Friedman et al., 2004; Peplau & Garnets, 2000;
                                           Rothblum, 2000; Rust, 2002). Although the overall proportion of undergraduate students
                                           categorized as a sexual minority did not statistically differ between the two measures in this
                                           study, we found some important differences in how sexual minority groups were classified.
                                           For example, more than one-third of participants who self-identified as “bisexual” on the
                                           three-category sexual identity measure chose “mostly heterosexual” or “mostly lesbian/gay”
                                           when answering the expanded five-category measure. These students would have been
                                           misclassified as either gay/lesbian or heterosexual had we used the five-category measure
                                           and collapsed the categories outward, as is common practice.
                                           Our findings also indicate that decisions regarding the measurement and coding of sexual
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           identity in survey research may have important implications in terms of substance use
                                           outcomes. Recent work recommends using “mostly heterosexual” and “mostly lesbian/gay”
                                           categories for measuring sexual identity among adolescents and young adults (Austin et al.,
                                           2007; Saewyc et al., 2004; Thompson & Morgan, 2008); however, very little research has
                                           examined the association between the “mostly” categories and health outcomes such as
                                           substance use. Notably, we found that participants who endorsed the “mostly heterosexual”
                                           category reported the highest rates of substance use, which is consistent with a growing
                                           literature indicating heightened health risks among individuals who identify in this manner
                                           (Austin et al., 2009; Corliss, Rosario, Wypij, Fisher, & Austin, 2008; Hughes, Szalacha &
                                           McNair, 2010; Hughes, Szalacha, Johnson et al., 2010; Ziyadeh et al., 2007).
                                           Austin et al. (2007) conducted cognitive processing interviews regarding sexual identity
                                           measures and found that adolescents preferred the “mostly” categories because these options
                                           most closely reflected their feelings of being somewhere between the categories of
                                           heterosexual, bisexual, and lesbian/gay. Our results indicate that nearly all individuals who
                                           identified as “mostly heterosexual” according to the five-category sexual identity measure
                                           selected “heterosexual” on the three-category measure. The five-category measure identifies
                                           a subgroup of men and women who had greater odds of using more substances than any of
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           the five sexual minority subgroups. It seems plausible that individuals who selected “mostly
                                           heterosexual” could represent a subgroup who lack a recognized group sexual identity and
                                           that this may contribute to their heightened risk for substance use. It is also possible that
                                           such individuals are in an identity exploration stage and have not yet clearly committed to a
                                           particular sexual identity (Cass, 1979, 1996). Such exploration may extend to a number of
                                           areas, including experimentation with alcohol and other drugs, and this may contribute to
                                           high-risk substance use behaviors among these individuals (Bishop, Macy-Lewis,
                                           Schnekloth, Puswella, & Struessel, 1997). Thus, it seems advisable to exercise caution when
                                           recoding and combining data involving the “mostly” sexual identity categories.
                                           All of the participants in the current study who identified as non-heterosexual showed
                                           heightened risk on each of the substance use outcomes assessed in the study with the
                                           exception of binge drinking. However, in analyses using the three-category sexual identity
                                           format, men who identified as gay had significantly lower odds of binge drinking than
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                            Page 7
                                           heterosexual men (but this was not the case in analyses using the five-category sexual
                                           identity measure). Although the small cell sizes of some of the subgroups in analyses using
                                           the five-category measure may have contributed to the statistically non-significant findings,
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           our results were consistent with previous research indicating that gay men were at lower risk
                                           for binge drinking than their heterosexual peers (Eisenberg & Wechsler, 2003; McCabe et
                                           al., 2003,2005). Given the potentially harmful impact of binge drinking among adolescents/
                                           young adults (Presley et al., 1996; Wechsler, Davenport, Dowdall, Moeykens, & Castillo,
                                           1994), and the need for preventive interventions that more effectively target subgroups at
                                           highest risk for this pattern of drinking, substance abuse researchers need to understand the
                                           implications of using broader versus more nuanced measures to assess sexual orientation.
                                           In much of the previous health research with sexual minority groups, data from bisexual
                                           participants have either been combined with data from lesbians or gay men (e.g., Bontempo
                                           & D'Augelli, 2002; Garofalo et al., 1998; Mays & Cochran, 2001; Mays, Yancey, Cochran,
                                           Weber, & Fielding, 2002) or excluded from analyses (e.g., Aaron et al., 2001; Hughes et al.,
                                           2005). However, recent studies that have included comparisons of bisexual participants have
                                           found that bisexual women and men (whether defined based on identity, attraction or sexual
                                           behavior) generally report higher rates of substance use and poorer mental health outcomes
                                           than their heterosexual counterparts and, in some cases, than their lesbian/gay counterparts
                                           as well (e.g., Bostwick et al., 2010; Corliss et al., 2008; Eisenberg & Wechsler, 2003;
                                           McCabe et al., 2004, 2009; Wilsnack et al., 2008). Given our finding that bisexual groups,
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           specifically bisexual women, reported significantly higher frequencies of substance use
                                           when using the three-item measure, we recommend that researchers exercise caution when
                                           combining all non-heterosexuals into an umbrella “sexual minority” category. This practice
                                           may inflate estimates of risk and substance use behaviors among some groups and
                                           erroneously weaken estimates among others. Where possible, sexual orientation groups
                                           should be considered separately in analyses. If there are theoretical or conceptual reasons for
                                           creating an omnibus “sexual minority” category, this should be made explicit. In those
                                           instances where researchers choose to combine groups to enhance statistical power, they
                                           should at least report whether or not separate analyses produced different results. Finally,
                                           because it is still common practice to combine all “non-heterosexual” groups, comparisons
                                           between studies must be made cautiously and only after careful consideration of the format
                                           and wording of questions in the studies being compared.
                                           The present study included a number of strengths, such as the probability-based simple
                                           random sample and randomized design. However, subgroups of sexual minorities were
                                           small and therefore, substantially limited statistical power to detect differences that may
                                           have been apparent in larger samples. Also, the student population was predominantly
                                           White, traditional-age (18–22 years of age), and middle to upper class. Thus, results cannot
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           be generalized to all university or college populations. More research is needed with more
                                           diverse populations, with a broader age range that includes both college students as well as
                                           those not attending college. Although data collected in 2003 may represent a limitation, the
                                           challenges of measuring sexual identity remain highly relevant. Furthermore, the prevalence
                                           of sexual minorities has remained stable over time. Data collected for the SLS between 2001
                                           and 2009 show very little variation in prevalence based on self-identity: 2001 (3.3%), 2003
                                           (3.2%), 2005 (3.3%), 2007 (3.3%) and 2009 (3.3%). We chose to focus on sexual identity in
                                           order to compare our results with other studies of college-age sexual minorities that have
                                           used three- and five-category measures.
                                           Concerns about response bias due to the sensitive nature of the questions were lessened by
                                           findings that our study sample resembled the overall student population and that reported
                                           rates of substance use and sexual minority identity were similar to those found in previous
                                           adolescent and college-based studies (e.g., Garofalo et al., 1998; Johnston, O'Malley,
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                             Page 8
                                           Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2004; McCabe et al., 2003; Mohler-Kuo, Lee, & Wechsler,
                                           2003). Nevertheless, the possibility of under-reporting of both substance use and sexual
                                           minority identity cannot be ignored. The small cell sizes of some of the subgroups may have
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           contributed to some of the statistically non-significant findings in the present study.
                                           Although it is reasonable to posit that having an additional sexual identity question earlier in
                                           the survey may have biased responses to the later question, we found no statistically
                                           significant differences in the response distributions on the five-category sexual identity
                                           measure depending on which survey was utilized. This suggests that responses were not
                                           substantially influenced by including the earlier question. Discrepancies were rare and
                                           appeared to be the result of participant error. For example, four students who indicated they
                                           were heterosexual on the three-category sexual identity question chose “only lesbian/gay”
                                           on the five-category measure, suggesting that they either misread or misunderstood one or
                                           both of the questions.
                                           Because few studies have been conducted using a Web-based survey approach, we are
                                           uncertain about potential mode effects. Past research on sexual orientation and health
                                           outcomes has involved a wide range of data collection modalities, including face-to-face
                                           interviews (e.g., Floyd & Stein, 2002; Hughes et al., 2006; Scheer et al., 2003), telephone
                                           interviews (e.g., Diamant, Wold, Spritzer, & Gelberg, 2000; Mays & Cochran, 2001; Mays
                                           et al., 2002), self-administered survey questionnaires sent via U.S. mail (e.g., Eisenberg &
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Wechsler, 2003), self-administered survey questionnaires conducted in school classrooms
                                           (e.g., Bontempo & D'Augelli, 2002; Garofalo et al., 1998), and mixed methods of data
                                           collection (e.g., Jorm et al., 2002; Russell et al., 2002). Previous research has found that a
                                           Web-based survey mode of administration produced the same proportion of sexual
                                           minorities as a U.S. mail-based survey mode of administration among undergraduate college
                                           students (about 3%), as well as similar substance use outcomes (e.g., McCabe, 2004;
                                           McCabe, Boyd, Couper, Crawford, & d'Arcy, 2002). In addition, the Web-based survey
                                           mode of administration resulted in a final sample that more closely matched the
                                           demographic characteristics of the target sample than the traditional U.S. mail-based survey
                                           mode. Nevertheless, given previous research indicating that different modes of data
                                           collection can lead to substantially different prevalence estimates, especially in response to
                                           questions related to sensitive topics such as illicit drug use and sexual behavior (e.g.,
                                           Fendrich & Johnson, 2001; Gfroerer, Wright, & Kopstein, 1997; Sudman, 2001; Turner et
                                           al., 1998; Wright, Aquilino, & Supple, 1998), more research is needed to examine how
                                           different survey modes influence the reporting of sexual identity and sensitive health
                                           outcomes, and whether differences in question wording and alternative modes of data
                                           collection interact to affect survey responses.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Future research is needed with measures of sexual identity not examined in the present
                                           study. For example, a seven-category measure might provide even more nuanced variations
                                           in sexual identity. However, such studies will require much larger samples given that a
                                           seven-category measure would result in even smaller sample sizes for some of the
                                           subgroups. Finally, the present study relied largely on one-item measures for purposes of
                                           making comparisons and future work should consider more comprehensive measures.
                                           In conclusion, our findings illustrate several challenges associated with assessing sexual
                                           identity in survey research. We found evidence that the five-category response scale may
                                           under-count bisexual participants and that substance use outcomes can differ based on the
                                           type of sexual identity question used and how responses are analyzed. These findings
                                           suggest that researchers need to carefully consider question wording, as well as whether and
                                           how to recode responses to questions related to sexual orientation. It is also important to
                                           describe methods used to code and analyze data, as well as the rationale for such decisions.
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                                               Page 9
                              Acknowledgments
                                           This Student Life Survey was supported by the University of Michigan. The development of this article was
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           supported by research grants DA07267 and DA023055 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse, National
                                           Institutes of Health, and by a research grant AA013328 from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
                                           Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
                                           necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institute on Alcohol
                                           Abuse and Alcoholism, nor the National Institutes of Health. The authors would like to thank MSInteractive for
                                           assistance with data collection and Hannah d'Arcy and Brady West for their assistance with data analysis. The
                                           authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on a previous version of the article.
                              References
                                           Aaron DJ, Markovic N, Danielson ME, Honnold JA, Janosky JE, Schmidt NJ. Behavioral risk factors
                                             for disease and preventive health practices among lesbians. American Journal of Public Health.
                                             2001; 91:972–975. [PubMed: 11392943]
                                           Austin SB, Conron KJ, Patel A, Freedner N. Making sense of sexual orientation measures: Findings
                                             from a cognitive processing study with adolescents on health survey questions. Journal of LGBT
                                             Health Research. 2007; 3:55–65. [PubMed: 18029316]
                                           Austin SB, Ziyadeh NJ, Corliss HL, Rosario M, Wypij D, Haines J, et al. Sexual orientation disparities
                                             in purging and binge eating from early to late adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2009;
                                             45:238–245. [PubMed: 19699419]
                                           Bishop DI, Macy-Lewis JA, Schnekloth CA, Puswella S, Strussel GI. Ego identity status and reported
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                             alcohol consumption: A study of first-year college students. Journal of Adolescence. 1997; 20:209–
                                             218. [PubMed: 9104656]
                                           Bontempo DE, D'Augelli AR. Effects of at-school victimization and sexual orientation on lesbian, gay,
                                             or bisexual youths' health risk behavior. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2002; 30:364–374. [PubMed:
                                             11996785]
                                           Bostwick WB, Boyd CJ, Hughes TL, McCabe SE. Dimensions of sexual orientation and the
                                             prevalence of mood and anxiety disorders in the United States. American Journal of Public Health.
                                             2010; 100:468–475. [PubMed: 19696380]
                                           Boyd CJ, McCabe SE, d'Arcy H. Ecstasy use among college undergraduates: Gender, race and sexual
                                             identity. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment. 2003; 24:209–215. [PubMed: 12810141]
                                           Case P, Austin B, Hunter DJ, Manson JE, Malspeis S, Willett WC, Spiegelman D. Sexual orientation,
                                             health risk factors, and physical functioning in the Nurses' Health Study II. Journal of Women's
                                             Health. 2004; 13:1033–1047.
                                           Cass V. Homosexual identity formation: A theoretical perspective. Journal of Homosexuality. 1979;
                                             4:219–235. [PubMed: 264126]
                                           Cass, V. Sexual orientation identity formation: A western phenomenon. In: Cabaj, RP.; Stein, TS.,
                                               editors. Textbook of homosexuality and mental health. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
                                               Press; 1996. p. 227-251.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Cochran SD, Ackerman D, Mays VM, Ross MW. Prevalence of non-medical drug use and dependence
                                               among homosexually active men and women in the US population. Addiction. 2004; 99:989–998.
                                               [PubMed: 15265096]
                                           Corliss HL, Rosario M, Wypij D, Fisher LB, Austin SB. Sexual orientation disparities in longitudinal
                                               alcohol use patterns among adolescents. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine. 2008;
                                               162:1071–1078. [PubMed: 18981356]
                                           DeBord KA, Wood PK, Sher KJ, Good GE. The relevance of sexual orientation to substance abuse and
                                               psychological distress among college students. Journal of College Student Development. 1998;
                                               39:157–168.
                                           Diamant AL, Wold C, Spritzer K, Gelberg L. Health behaviors, health status, and access to and use of
                                               health care: A population-based study of lesbian, bisexual, and heterosexual women. Archives of
                                               Family Medicine. 2000; 9:1043–1051. [PubMed: 11115206]
                                           Diamond LM. Female bisexuality from adolescence to adulthood: Results from a 10-year longitudinal
                                               study. Developmental Psychology. 2008; 44:5–14. [PubMed: 18194000]
                                                Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                                Page 10
                                           Drabble L, Midanik LT, Trocki K. Reports of alcohol consumption and alcohol-related problems
                                               among homosexual, bisexual, and heterosexual participants: Results from the 2000 National
                                               Alcohol Survey. Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 2005; 66:111–120. [PubMed: 15830911]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Eisenberg M, Wechsler H. Substance use behaviors among college students with same-sex and
                                               opposite-sex experience: Results from a national study. Addictive Behaviors. 2003; 28:899–913.
                                               [PubMed: 12788264]
                                           Fendrich M, Johnson TP. Examining prevalence differences in three national surveys of youth: Impact
                                               of consent procedures, mode and editing rules. Journal of Drug Issues. 2001; 31:615–642.
                                           Floyd FJ, Stein TS. Sexual orientation identity formation among gay, lesbian, and bisexual youths:
                                               Multiple patterns of milestone experiences. Journal of Research on Adolescence. 2002; 12:167–
                                               191.
                                           Friedman MS, Silvestre AJ, Gold MA, Markovic N, Savin-Williams RC, Huggins J, et al. Adolescents
                                               define sexual orientation and suggest ways to measure it. Journal of Adolescence. 2004; 27:303–
                                               317. [PubMed: 15159090]
                                           Garofalo R, Wolf RC, Kessel S, Palfrey SJ, DuRant RH. The association between health risk behaviors
                                               and sexual orientation among a school-based sample of adolescents. Pediatrics. 1998; 101:895–
                                               902. [PubMed: 9565422]
                                           Gfroerer J, Wright D, Kopstein A. Prevalence of youth substance use: The impact of methodological
                                               differences between two national surveys. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 1997; 47:19–30.
                                               [PubMed: 9279494]
                                           Hughes TL. Lesbians' drinking patterns: Beyond the data. Substance Use and Misuse. 2003; 38:1739–
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                               1758. [PubMed: 14582576]
                                           Hughes TL, Johnson T, Wilsnack SC. Sexual assault and alcohol abuse: A comparison of lesbians and
                                               heterosexual women. Journal of Substance Abuse. 2001; 13:515–532. [PubMed: 11775080]
                                           Hughes TL, Szalacha LA, Johnson TP, Kinnison KE, Wilsnack SC, Cho Y. Sexual victimization and
                                               hazardous drinking among heterosexual and sexual minority women. Addictive Behaviors. 2010;
                                               35:1152–1156. [PubMed: 20692771]
                                           Hughes TL, Szalacha LA, McNair R. Substance abuse and mental health disparities: Comparisons
                                               across sexual identity groups in a national sample of young Australian women. Social Science and
                                               Medicine. 2010; 71:824–831. [PubMed: 20579794]
                                           Hughes, TL.; Wilsnack, SC.; Johnson, T. Investigating lesbian's mental health and alcohol use: What
                                               is an appropriate comparison group?. In: Omoto, AM.; Kurtzman, HS., editors. Sexual orientation
                                               and mental health: Examining identity and development in lesbian, gay, and bisexual people.
                                               Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2005. p. 167-184.
                                           Hughes TL, Wilsnack SC, Szalacha LA, Johnson T, Bostwick WB, Seymour R, et al. Age and race/
                                               ethnic differences in drinking and drinking-related problems in a community sample of lesbians.
                                               Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 2006; 67:579–590. [PubMed: 16736078]
                                           Johnston, LD.; O'Malley, PM.; Bachman, JG. Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug
                                               use, 1975-2000 Vol II: College students and adults ages 19-40 (NIH publication No 01-4925).
                                               Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse; 2001.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Johnston, LD.; O'Malley, PM.; Bachman, JG.; Schulenberg, JE. Monitoring the Future national survey
                                               results on drug use, 1975-2003 Vol II: College students and Adults Ages 19-45 (NIH publication
                                               04-5508). Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse; 2004.
                                           Jorm AF, Korten AE, Rodgers B, Jacomb PA, Christensen H. Sexual orientation and mental health:
                                               Results from a community survey of young and middle-aged adults. British Journal of Psychiatry.
                                               2002; 180:423–427. [PubMed: 11983639]
                                           Laumann, EO.; Gagnon, JH.; Michael, RT.; Michaels, S. The social organization of sexuality: Sexual
                                               practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1994.
                                           Matthews AK, Hughes TL, Johnson T, Razzano LA, Cassidy R. Prediction of depressive distress in a
                                               community sample women: the role of sexual orientation. American Journal of Public Health.
                                               2002; 92:1131–1139. [PubMed: 12084697]
                                           Mays VM, Cochran SD. Mental health correlates of perceived discrimination among lesbian, gay, and
                                               bisexual adults in the United States. American Journal of Public Health. 2001; 91:1869–1876.
                                               [PubMed: 11684618]
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                                    Page 11
                                           Mays VM, Yancey AK, Cochran SD, Weber M, Fielding JE. Heterogeneity of health disparities
                                               among African American, Hispanic, and Asian American women: unrecognized influences of
                                               sexual orientation. American Journal of Public Health. 2002; 92:632–639. [PubMed: 11919064]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           McCabe SE. Survey mode effects for self-reporting illicit drug use: Web vs. U.S. mail. Journal of
                                               Drug Education. 2004; 34:61–72. [PubMed: 15468748]
                                           McCabe SE, Boyd CJ, Couper MP, Crawford S, d'Arcy H. Mode effects for collecting alcohol and
                                               other drug data: Web and U.S. mail. Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 2002; 63:755–761. [PubMed:
                                               12529076]
                                           McCabe SE, Boyd CJ, Hughes TL, d'Arcy H. Sexual identity and substance use among undergraduate
                                               students. Substance Abuse. 2003; 242:77–91. [PubMed: 12766375]
                                           McCabe SE, Hughes TL, Bostwick W, Boyd CJ. Assessment of difference in dimensions of sexual
                                               orientation: Implications for substance use research in a college-age population. Journal of Studies
                                               on Alcohol. 2005; 66:620–629. [PubMed: 16331847]
                                           McCabe SE, Hughes TL, Bostwick WB, West BT, Boyd CJ. Sexual orientation, substance use
                                               behaviors and substance dependence in the United States. Addiction. 2009; 104:1333–1345.
                                               [PubMed: 19438839]
                                           McCabe SE, Hughes TL, Boyd CJ. Substance use and misuse: Are bisexual women at greater risk?
                                               Journal of Psycho-active Drugs. 2004; 36:217–225.
                                           Meyer I. Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations:
                                               Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin. 2003; 129:674–697. [PubMed:
                                               12956539]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Mohler-Kuo M, Lee JE, Wechsler H. Trends in marijuana and other illicit drug use among college
                                               students. Results from 4 Harvard School of Public Health College Alcohol Study Surveys: 1993–
                                               2001. Journal of American College Health. 2003; 52:17–24. [PubMed: 14717576]
                                           Omoto, AM.; Kurtzman, HS. Sexual orientation and mental health: Examining identity and
                                               development in lesbian, gay, and bisexual people. Washington, DC: American Psychological
                                               Association; 2005.
                                           Peplau LA, Garnets LD. A new paradigm for understanding women's sexuality and sexual orientation.
                                               Journal of Social Issues. 2000; 56:330–350.
                                           Presley, CA.; Meilman, PW.; Cashin, JR. Alcohol and drugs on American college campuses: Use,
                                               consequences, and perceptions of the campus environment. Vol. IV. Carbondale, IL: Southern
                                               Illinois University; 1996. p. 1992-1994.
                                           Rothblum ED. Sexual orientation and sex in women's lives: Conceptual and methodological issues.
                                               Journal of Social Issues. 2000; 56:193–204.
                                           Russell ST, Driscoll AK, Truong N. Adolescent same-sex romantic attractions and relationships:
                                               implications for substance use and abuse. American Journal of Public Health. 2002; 92:198–202.
                                               [PubMed: 11818291]
                                           Rust PC. Bisexuality: The state of the union. Annual Review of Sex Research. 2002; 13:180–240.
                                           Saewyc EM, Bauer GR, Skay CL, Bearinger LH, Resnick MD, Reis E, Murphy A. Measuring sexual
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                               orientation in adolescents health surveys: Evaluation of eight school-based surveys. Journal of
                                               Adolescent Health. 2004; 35:1–15.
                                           Scheer S, Parks CA, McFarland W, Shafer KP, Delgado V, Ruiz JD, et al. Self-reported sexual
                                               identity, sexual behaviors and health risks: Examples from a population-based survey of young
                                               women. Journal of Lesbian Studies. 2003; 7:69–84.
                                           Sell RL. Defining and measuring sexual orientation: a review. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 1997;
                                               26:643–658. [PubMed: 9415799]
                                           Sell RL, Becker JB. Sexual orientation data collection and progress toward Healthy People 2010.
                                               American Journal of Public Health. 2001; 91:876–882. [PubMed: 11392926]
                                           Solarz, AL. Lesbian health: Current assessment and directions for the future. Washington, DC:
                                               National Academy Press; 1999.
                                           Sudman S. Examining substance abuse data collection methodologies. Journal of Drug Issues. 2001;
                                               31:695–716.
                                           Thompson EM, Morgan EM. “Mostly straight” young women: Variations in sexual behavior and
                                               identity development. Developmental Psychology. 2008; 44:15–21. [PubMed: 18194001]
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                                  Page 12
                                           Turner CF, Ku L, Rogers SM, Lindberg LD, Pleck JH, Sonenstein FL. Adolescent sexual behavior,
                                               drug use, and violence: Increased reporting with computer survey technology. Science. 1998;
                                               280:867–873. [PubMed: 9572724]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                           Wechsler H, Davenport A, Dowdall G, Moeykens B, Castillo S. Health and behavioral consequences
                                               of binge drinking in college: A national survey of students at 140 campuses. Journal of the
                                               American Medical Association. 1994; 272:1672–1677. [PubMed: 7966895]
                                           Wechsler H, Dowdall GW, Davenport A, Rimm EB. A gender-specific measure of binge drinking
                                               among college students. American Journal of Public Health. 1995; 85:982–985. [PubMed:
                                               7604925]
                                           Wechsler H, Lee JE, Kuo M, Seibring M, Nelson TF, Lee H. Trends in college binge drinking during a
                                               period of increased prevention efforts: Findings from 4 Harvard School of Public Health College
                                               Alcohol Study surveys: 1993–2001. Journal of American College Health. 2002; 50:203–217.
                                               [PubMed: 11990979]
                                           Wilsnack SC, Hughes TL, Johnson TL, Bostwick WB, Szalacha LA, Benson PB, et al. Sexual
                                               orientation and drinking: A comparison of lesbian and heterosexual women. Journal of Studies on
                                               Alcohol and Drugs. 2008; 69:129–139. [PubMed: 18080073]
                                           Wright DL, Aquilino WS, Supple AI. A comparison of computer-assisted and paper-and-pencil self-
                                               administered questionnaires in a survey on smoking, alcohol, and other drug use. Public Opinion
                                               Quarterly. 1998; 62:331–353.
                                           Ziyadeh NJ, Prokop LA, Fisher LB, Rosario M, Field AE, Camargo CA, Austin SB. Sexual
                                               orientation, gender, and alcohol use in a cohort study of U.S. adolescent girls and boys. Drug and
                                               Alcohol Dependence. 2007; 87:119–130. [PubMed: 16971055]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                               Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                                                                                                                                             NIH-PA Author Manuscript                                               NIH-PA Author Manuscript                                               NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Table 1
                                                                            Demographic characteristics of participants who were asked both sexual identity questions (n = 2,077)
                                                                        Response option categories       Gender                                     Race                                                              Class year*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     McCabe et al.
                                                                                                         Male (n=870) %     Female (n=1207) %       White (n=1409) %       Asian (n=278) %      Other (n=390) %       Freshmen (n=330) %        Sophomore (n=508) %        Junior (n=545) %       Senior (n=683) %
                                                                        Three-category sexual identity
                                                                        Heterosexual (n = 2003)          42                 58                      68                     14                   19                    16                        25                         26                     33
                                                                        Bisexual (n = 39)                26                 74                      62                     5                    33                    23                        26                         18                     33
                                                                        Lesbian/gay (n=35)               74                 26                      77                     3                    20                    20                        11                         34                     34
                                                                        Five-category sexual identity
                                                                        Only heterosexual (n = 1841)     43                 57                      68                     14                   18                    16                        25                         26                     33
                                                                        Mostly heterosexual (n =169)     26                 74                      71                     9                    20                    16                        23                         25                     35
                                                                        Bisexual (n =26)                 23                 77                      58                     12                   31                    15                        19                         23                     42
                                                                        Mostly lesbian/gay (n= 18)       67                 33                      56                     6                    39                    28                        11                         28                     33
                                                                        Only lesbian/gay (n =23)         78                 22                      91                     0                    9                     13                        17                         35                     35
                                                                    *
                                                                     Note: There were 11 participants indicating “Heterosexual” on the three-category sexual identity question who did not respond with a class level; of these 11 participants, 8 indicated “Only heterosexual” and 3 indicated “Mostly heterosexual” on the five-category sexual
                                                                    identity question
Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 13

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                            Page 14
                                                                                             Table 2
                                               Percentage distributions of sexual identity based on participants asked two sexual identity
                                               measures, female sample
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                     Three-category sexual identity measure
                                                     Heterosexual (n)      Lesbian (n)   Bisexual (n)
                            Five-category sexual identity measure
                              Only heterosexual                     1051            0              0
                              Mostly heterosexual                    116            0              9
                              Bisexual                                 0            0             20
                              Mostly lesbian                           0            6              0
                              Only lesbian                             2            3              0
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                       Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                           McCabe et al.                                                                                          Page 15
                                                                                            Table 3
                                             Percentage distributions of sexual identity based on participants asked two sexual identity
                                             measures, male sample
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                     Three-category sexual identity measure
                                                     Heterosexual (n)     Gay (n)   Bisexual (n)
                            Five-category sexual identity measure
                              Only heterosexual                     790        0              0
                              Mostly heterosexual                    41        0              3
                              Bisexual                                1        0              5
                              Mostly gay                              0       10              2
                              Only gay                                2       16              0
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                       Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.

                                                                    NIH-PA Author Manuscript                                                   NIH-PA Author Manuscript                                           NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                                                                                                                                           Table 4
                                                                            Prevalence and logistic regression models among participants asked both sexual identity questions: substance use outcomes, female sample
                                                                        Response option categories       Cigarette use in past 30 days     Binge drinking in past 2 weeks     Marijuana use in past year   Other illicit drug use in past yeara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             McCabe et al.
                                                                                                             %     AORb (95% CI)                %     AORb (95% CI)              %     AORb (95% CI)              %    AORb (95% CI)
                                                                        Three-category sexual identity
                                                                        Heterosexual                       17.3    –                          51.0    –                         34.5   –                         7.5   –
                                                                        Bisexual                           37.9    2.9 (1.3, 6.2)**           51.7    1.0 (0.5, 2.0)            69.0   4.1 (1.9, 9.2)**         24.1   4.0 (1.7, 9.8)**
                                                                        Lesbian                            44.4    3.7 (1.0, 13.9)            44.4    0.7 (0.2, 2.7)            55.6   2.3 (0.6, 8.6)           22.2   3.3 (0.7, 16.3)
                                                                                                                   1249                               1237                             1209                            1216
                                                                        Five-category sexual identity
                                                                        Only heterosexual                  15.6    –                          49.9    –                         32.2   –                         6.1   –
                                                                        Mostly heterosexual                31.7    2.5 (1.7, 3.8)***          56.3    1.3 (0.9, 1.9)            57.1   2.8 (1.9, 4.1)***        19.0   3.6 (2.1, 6.1)***
                                                                        Bisexual                           28.6    2.2 (0.8, 5.7)             42.9    0.8 (0.3, 1.8)            52.4   2.4 (1.0, 5.7)           28.6   6.5 (2.4, 17.7)***
                                                                        Mostly lesbian                     33.3    2.5 (0.5, 14.0)            50.0    0.9 (0.2, 4.7)            50.0   1.8 (0.4, 9.3)           33.3   6.2 (1.1, 35.4)*
                                                                        Only lesbian                       60.0    8.0 (1.3, 48.7)*           40.0    0.6 (0.1, 3.7)            80.0   8.4 (0.9, 77.1)           0.0   –
                                                                                                                   1208                               1201                             1200                            1207
                                                                    Note: The dash (–) indicates reference group. Sample sizes ranged from 1200 (marijuana use in past year, five-category measure) to 1249 (cigarette use in past 30 days, three-category measure) due to
                                                                    missing responses. The model for other illicit drug use for the five-category measure did not converge due to the zero cell
                                                                    *
                                                                        p<.05
                                                                    **
                                                                         p<.01
Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.
                                                                    ***
                                                                          p<.001
                                                                    a
                                                                     Other illicit drug use consisted of any use of cocaine, LSD, other psychedelics, amphetamines, crystal methamphetamine, heroin, inhalants, ecstasy, GHB or Rohypnol
                                                                    b
                                                                        Odds ratios were adjusted for race and class year. The results for these variables are not shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 16

                                                                    NIH-PA Author Manuscript                                                    NIH-PA Author Manuscript                                         NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                                                                                                                                          Table 5
                                                                              Prevalence and logistic regression models among participants asked both sexual identity questions: substance use outcomes, male sample
                                                                        Response option categories       Cigarette use in past 30 days     Binge drinking in past 2 weeks    Marijuana use in past year   Other illicit drug use in past yeara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   McCabe et al.
                                                                                                             %     AORb (95% CI)                 %     AORb (95% CI)            %     AORb (95% CI)               %     AORb (95% CI)
                                                                        Three-category sexual identity
                                                                        Heterosexual                       22.8    –                           57.6    –                       37.1   –                         13.4    –
                                                                        Bisexual                           38.5    2.3 (0.7, 7.2)              53.8    1.1 (0.3, 3.2)          54.5   2.7 (0.8, 9.3)            45.5    6.6 (1.9, 22.9)**
                                                                        Gay                                18.5    0.8 (0.3, 2.0)              37.0    0.4 (0.2, 0.9)*         51.9   1.8 (0.8, 3.8)            22.2    1.8 (0.7, 4.7)
                                                                                                                   917                                 914                            882                               887
                                                                        Five-category sexual identity
                                                                        Only heterosexual                  20.5    –                           56.5    –                       36.7   –                         12.3    –
                                                                        Mostly heterosexual                42.6    2.9 (1.6, 5.3)**            63.8    1.4 (0.7, 2.6)          53.2   2.0 (1.1, 3.7)*           38.3    4.5 (2.4, 8.5)***
                                                                        Bisexual                           14.3    0.7 (0.1, 6.1)              28.6    0.4 (0.1, 2.1)          28.6   1.0 (0.2, 5.1)            14.3    1.6 (0.2, 13.6)
                                                                        Mostly gay                         16.7    0.8 (0.2, 3.9)              50.0    0.9 (0.3, 2.8)          66.7   4.4 (1.3, 15.2)*          41.7    6.0 (1.8, 20.0)**
                                                                        Only gay                           16.7    0.7 (0.2, 2.6)              38.9    0.4 (0.1, 1.0)          38.9   0.9 (0.4, 2.5)            11.1    0.8 (0.2, 3.6)
                                                                                                                   869                                 868                            865                               870
                                                                    Note: The dash (–) indicates reference group. Sample sizes ranged from 865 (marijuana use in past year, five-category measure) to 917 (cigarette use in past 30 days, three-category measure) due to missing
                                                                    responses. The models for other illicit drug use for the three-category and five-category measures did not converge
                                                                    *
                                                                        p<.05
                                                                    **
                                                                         p<.01
Arch Sex Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 01.
                                                                    ***
                                                                          p<.001
                                                                    a
                                                                     Other illicit drug use consisted of any use of cocaine, LSD, other psychedelics, amphetamines, crystal methamphetamine, heroin, inhalants, ecstasy, GHB or Rohypnol
                                                                    b
                                                                        Odds ratios are adjusted for race and class year. The results for these variables are not shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 17

