Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                              Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
  MEASURING SAME-SEX COUPLES: THE WHAT AND WHO OF MISREPORTING ON RELATIONSHIP AND
                                                          SEX
                                          SEHSD Working Paper 2015-12
                              Jamie M. Lewis, Nancy Bates, and Matthew Streeter 1
                                                U.S. Census Bureau
                                                  Issued May 2015
ABSTRACT
         Prior research on same-sex couples has identified relative group size as a key issue in obtaining
accurate estimates. If a small percentage of opposite-sex couples is misreported as same-sex, the impact
on estimates of same-sex couples is substantial. Despite the Census Bureau’s development of a revised
relationship item, inconsistency in reports of couples’ relationship versus sex persists. Here, we
investigate relationship-sex inconsistency in the 2013 American Housing Survey. Results suggest
inconsistencies are due more to errors on the relationship item than sex. Both inconsistent reports and
mismarks on relationship are most common for couples whose relationship was reported as same-sex
married, followed by same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex unmarried, and opposite-sex married couples.
Older respondents and larger households are associated with mismarks on relationship, and returning
households are less likely to have sex misreported. We suggest some strategies, such as educating
interviewers about relative group size, to improve estimates of same-sex couples.
1
  This paper is released to inform interested parties of ongoing research and to encourage discussion of work in
progress. The views expressed on statistical or methodological issues are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the U.S. Census Bureau.
                                                                                                                   1

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                       Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
  MEASURING SAME-SEX COUPLES: THE WHAT AND WHO OF MISREPORTING ON RELATIONSHIP AND
                                                     SEX
                            Jamie M. Lewis, Nancy Bates, and Matthew Streeter
INTRODUCTION
         Recent years have seen a call for improved estimates of same-sex couples. The need for quality
estimates has grown in the first part of the 21st century, as recognition of same-sex couples has
hastened. Massachusetts was the first state to perform same-sex marriage in 2004, and many additional
states have followed suit. As of March 2015, thirty-seven states and the District of Columbia allow same-
sex marriage. Several more states have received judicial rulings against a ban on same-sex marriage,
though these decisions have been stayed pending appeal. Further, some states offer domestic
partnerships or civil unions to same-sex couples that grant some or all the privileges of marriage.
         Same-sex couples have also received greater recognition at the federal level. Although states
retain the right to determine legal recognition of same-sex marriage, a June 2013 Supreme Court
decision on the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) found Section 3 of the Act to be unconstitutional. That
is, DOMA can no longer be used to bar same-sex married couples from receiving federal benefits. As a
result, the Office of Personnel Management requires data on same-sex married couples to estimate
beneficiaries. Other federal agencies may soon use this information for programmatic reasons, as
marital status is a factor in many federal regulations and programs.
         Quality data on same-sex couples is also needed to assess levels of discrimination. For example,
the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) Office of Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity aims to ensure that all Americans have access to housing of their choice. More broadly,
there is a desire to describe the characteristics and well-being of members of same-sex couples as well
as children residing in households headed by these couples.
         For all these reasons, researchers at the Census Bureau have been working to improve the
measurement of same-sex couples, both married and unmarried. In this paper, we continue this
research by investigating inconsistency in reports of couples’ relationship status (i.e., same-sex married,
same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex married, or opposite-sex unmarried) versus sex in an experiment
conducted during the 2013 American Housing Survey (AHS). For instance, what is going on in cases
where a couple is recorded as a same-sex married couple on the relationship item, but one person’s sex
is marked as male and the other’s as female? The 2013 AHS data provide a unique opportunity because
                                                                                                           2

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                        Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
the survey’s split-panel design and large sample size allow us to investigate relationship-sex
inconsistency for a substantial number of same-sex couples. Here, we estimate whether errors are more
often made in reports of couples’ relationship or sex, and explore which couples have inconsistent data.
That is, we examine the what and who of misreporting on relationship and sex. Although a driving focus
is improving estimates of same-sex couples, we assess relationship-sex inconsistency for both same- and
opposite-sex couples. Further, the ultimate goal is a measurement strategy that accurately captures
various relationship forms.
BACKGROUND
Relationship Measurement
         Currently, the Census Bureau uses an indirect approach to measure couple type, including same-
sex couples, in the 2010 Census and most Census surveys. Information from both the relationship to
householder and sex items is needed to classify couples. Figure 1 shows the control relationship to
householder item as it appears in the 2013 AHS. As an example of how this information is used to
classify couples, if Person Two’s relationship to Person One was recorded as ‘Husband/wife/spouse,’ and
both Person One and Person Two’s sex recorded as ‘Male,’ they would be considered a same-sex
married couple.
                  Figure 1: Control Relationship to Householder Question from 2013 AHS
                                                                                                           3

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                              Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
         Census Bureau researchers have developed a revised relationship to householder item through
focus groups and cognitive testing. 2 The Interagency Working Group on Measuring Relationships in
Federal Household Surveys, convened by the Statistical and Science Policy Branch of the Office of
Management and Budget, has recommended that this revised question be tested and used more widely
(MRFHS 2014). The revised or test relationship item, as it appears in the AHS, is displayed in Figure 2. An
important change in the revised item is the expansion of the ‘Husband/wife/spouse’ and ‘Unmarried
Partner’ categories into separate choices for same- and opposite-sex couples. With this change, each of
the four couple types of interest—same-sex married, same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex married, and
opposite-sex unmarried—can be classified directly using only this item.
                    Figure 2: Test Relationship to Householder Question from 2013 AHS
         In addition to allowing direct measurement of couple type, the revised item can be compared to
the couple members’ responses on the sex item for consistency. In effect, this comparison provides a
check on the accuracy of reports on relationship and sex that is not possible when using the control
relationship question. This new approach should prove useful in 1) estimating error rates for the various
couple types, and 2) gaining insight into the nature and likely sources of these errors.
2
  DeMaio, Bates, and O’Connell (2013) provide a review of the qualitative testing that led to the revised
relationship item.
                                                                                                                 4

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                        Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
Previous Research
         Prior research on the measurement of same-sex couples has identified the issue of relative
group size as a key obstacle in obtaining accurate estimates (e.g., Cortina and Festy 2014; O’Connell and
Feliz 2011). This is a statistical issue whereby a small amount of measurement error among a very large
population leads to a large amount of error among a small population. In the case of couple
measurement, if a small percentage of opposite-sex couples has incorrect information on relationship or
sex and these couples are inadvertently recorded as same-sex couples, it has a substantial impact on
estimates of same-sex couples. This issue is more problematic among married couples compared with
unmarried couples, as opposite-sex married couples outnumber same-sex marrieds by a far greater
margin than opposite- versus same-sex unmarried couples.
        Using administrative records, Kreider and Lofquist (2015) found that some same-sex couples in
Census data result from misreporting. They tested this by matching couples’ sex as reported on the 2010
Census or 2010 American Community Survey (ACS) to sex on file with the Social Security Administration
(SSA). A substantial proportion of couples reported as same-sex in the ACS or 2010 Census appeared to
be opposite-sex in the SSA data. This discrepancy was more problematic for same-sex married couples
than for their unmarried counterparts. A full 57.3 percent of couples reported as same-sex married in
the ACS and 72.5 percent of these couples in the 2010 Census appeared to be opposite-sex in SSA data,
compared with 7.0 percent of same-sex unmarried couples in both the ACS and 2010 Census.
Inconsistencies for reported opposite-sex couples were also found, but were much less common. In both
the ACS and decennial Census, less than 1 percent of reported opposite-sex married couples appeared
to be same-sex in the SSA data. This was true of 1.6 percent of opposite-sex unmarried couples in the
ACS and 0.8 percent of these couples in the 2010 Census.
        Both the 2010 ACS and 2010 Census used the current or control version of the relationship to
householder item. Potentially, the revised relationship item, with its explicit categories for same- versus
opposite-sex relationships, may reduce errors of this type. As part of their study, Lofquist and Lewis
(2014) assessed the level of inconsistent reports on relationship and sex in the 2013 American Housing
Survey (AHS) for the panel receiving the revised relationship question. They concluded that although it
may be reduced, relationship-sex inconsistency remains an issue, particularly for couples reported as
same-sex married on the relationship item. In the AHS, 55.9 percent of couples recorded as same-sex
married on the relationship item and 12.7 percent of those marked as same-sex unmarried had opposite
                                                                                                           5

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                               Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
sexes marked on the sex item. In contrast, 0.6 percent of couples reported as opposite-sex married and
1.8 percent of those marked as opposite-sex unmarried had same sexes marked on the sex item.
         This phenomenon is not unique to the United States, and has been found to impact estimates of
same-sex couples in other Western countries. In the 2001 Census of Canada, 26.4 percent of couples
who had marked ‘Common-law partner (same-sex)’ on the relationship item reported one person as
male and the other as female on the sex item (Cortina and Festy 2014). 3 Estimates of same-sex couples
in the 2011 French census (Enquête annuelle de recensement, EAR) were corrected using information
from an accompanying family and housing survey (Enquête famille et logement, EFL). Of those couples
reported to be same-sex in the EAR, 43 percent were reclassified, mostly as opposite-sex couples
(Banens 2013). 4 Thus, the issue of relative group size is pervasive, affecting estimates of same-sex
couples for a variety of countries that measure relationship in different ways. Further, the Canadian
example, which specifies the sex composition of common-law partnerships, provides additional
evidence that explicit categories for same-and opposite-sex intimate relationships do not fully eliminate
the problem.
Current Study
         Our research serves the effort toward more accurate estimates of same-sex couples by
providing detailed information on misreports of couples’ relationship and sex. We investigate
relationship-sex inconsistency for four types of couples—same-sex married, same-sex unmarried,
opposite-sex married, and opposite-sex unmarried, classified according to their reports on the
relationship item. In particular, we address two research questions:
     •   Are errors more often made on the relationship or sex item? What can we learn using couple
         members’ first names and the associated probability of being male?
     •   Which couples are mismarked on relationship or sex? What are the characteristics of couples
         with inconsistent versus consistent reports on relationship and sex?
3
  Because Canada did not legalize same-sex marriage until 2005, the relationship item on the 2001 Census
questionnaire had a single category for spouse: ‘Husband or wife.’
4
  The 2011 EAR asked relationship to householder using an open-ended field rather than specific categories,
although some specific examples were offered, including: époux/épouse (spouse), union libre (free union, or
cohabitation), fils/fille (son or daughter), mère/père (mother or father), and sous-locataire (subtenant).
                                                                                                                  6

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                              Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
In researching these questions, our study delineates the what and who of couples’ relationship-sex
inconsistency. The ultimate aim is to learn more about the sources of inconsistency on sex and
relationship in order to develop improved strategies for addressing misreporting.
METHODOLOGY
Data
         We used data from the 2013 American Housing Survey (AHS) to conduct our research. The AHS
is sponsored by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), with data collected by the
Census Bureau. Although the AHS is designed primarily to monitor housing supply, conditions, and costs,
it also collects a wealth of demographic data. Further, its large sample size (the 2013 sample includes
about 167,000 housing units) makes it a good candidate for studying same-sex couples, who comprise
about 1 percent of all coupled households (Lofquist 2011).
         The 2013 AHS was fielded from May through September of 2013, and was comprised of both
national and metropolitan samples. More importantly, the survey featured a split-panel design, with
about half of the sampled households receiving the control version of the relationship to householder
item (see Figure 1), and the second half receiving the revised question (see Figure 2). We restricted our
analysis to data from the test panel, as relationship-sex inconsistency can only be assessed using the
revised relationship item. We further omitted interviews completed in a language other than English.
Although both an English and Spanish version of the instrument was fielded, the Spanish translations
require additional cognitive testing, and thus are not yet ready for quantitative analysis.
         The AHS was interviewer-administered via an automated Computer-Assisted Personal
Interviewing (CAPI) instrument. The interviewer could use the instrument to conduct interviews in-
person or over the phone. The instrument included automated soft edits aimed at reducing
inconsistencies on relationship and sex. In the test panel, these soft edits appeared when the recorded
relationship did not match the recorded sexes of the couple members, providing interviewers an
opportunity to correct errors on either item. 5
         The AHS is a panel survey of housing units, and uses dependent interviewing for returning
households in order to reduce errors and respondent burden. Although sex was not asked or verified for
5
  Because the AHS is interviewer-administered, it is difficult to determine whether a reporting error arises from the
answer the respondent provides or the response the interviewer records. We consider both possibilities.
                                                                                                                    7

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                         Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
returning households, it was displayed in the roster, which interviewers could enter to make corrections.
All respondents in the test panel, both new and returning, received the revised relationship item.
Method of Analysis
         In the initial part of our analysis, we describe what is going on with inconsistent reports on
relationship and sex. First, we estimated the proportion of all coupled households that have inconsistent
information on relationship and sex. Next, we used the first names of couple members and the
associated probability that a given name is male to judge whether couples’ relationship or their sex was
misreported. We used a method similar to that employed by O’Connell and Feliz (2011). Information on
the probability that a name is male was derived from the 2010 Census statistical names directory, and
this probability was merged onto the 2013 AHS data.
         The 2010 Census names directory was created at the state level from internal microdata on
individual records. Each name in the directory has a value for the male probability index, which ranges
from 0 to 1,000. The probability was obtained by taking the ratio of the number of times the name was
recorded with a male response to the sex item to the total number of times the name was recorded as
either male or female. We used the 95 percent rule, meaning that a person’s probable sex was classified
as male if that person’s name had a value on the male probability index of 950 or more. This value
means that when the name appeared in the 2010 Census for a given state, at least 950 times out of
1,000, or 95 percent of the time, the person was reported as male. A person’s probable sex was
classified as female if that person’s name had a value on the male probability index of 50 or below.
         Note that, using the 95 percent rule, probable sex can only be determined for a subset of the
AHS sample. First, a value on the male probability index is not available for some names. This occurs
where 1) there is not a full name for matching; 2) a name is not found in the names directory; or 3) in
fewer than 10 of the cases used to create the directory, a sex was reported along with the name.
Second, we do not determine probable sex for those with ambiguous names—names with a value
between 51 and 949 on the male probability index (e.g., Jamie, Taylor, Sidney). Despite these
limitations, we were able to apply this method to the majority of the sample. In 68.6 percent of couples
with inconsistent reports on relationship and sex, both couple members had a value on the male
probability index of 50 or below or 950 or above. That is, they fit the 95 percent rule, and we assigned
probable sex. Using this method, we compared probable sex and reported sex to judge whether a
                                                                                                            8

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                              Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
couples’ relationship or sex was misreported. Analysis was conducted by couple type—same-sex
married, same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex married, and opposite-sex unmarried. 6
          In the second part of the analysis, we investigate which couples have inconsistent reports on
relationship or sex, in two stages. The first stage involved a logistic regression predicting the likelihood
that a couple has inconsistent versus consistent reports on relationship and sex. All couples in the AHS
test panel were analyzed in this stage. For the second stage, we ran a multinomial logistic regression
model to understand which couples are more likely to 1) be misreported on sex or 2) have relationship
incorrectly coded, compared with having consistent responses. This stage of analysis excluded couples
that have inconsistent responses on relationship and sex but for whom we cannot determine which item
was incorrectly marked (i.e., couples where at least one member has a name that is ambiguous or at
least one member’s probable sex cannot be determined using the names directory). Regression models
include a number of demographic and social characteristics, including couple type, age of respondent,
Hispanic origin of respondent, nativity of respondent, education of respondent, and number of people in
the household. We also included information on whether the household was a returning household as a
predictor. 7
          All analyses were conducted using unweighted data, for two reasons. First, we are concerned
with investigating couples for whom errors were made on the relationship or sex item, rather than
making statements generalizable to the larger population. Second, even with the large size of the overall
AHS sample, sample sizes for couples with inconsistent responses on relationship and sex are small.
Because there are separate weights for households in the national versus metropolitan samples, several
couples with errors would be dropped from analysis were only one of the weights and its corresponding
sample used. All comparative statements in this paper have undergone statistical testing, and, unless
otherwise noted, all comparisons are statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level. 8
6
  In preliminary analysis, we looked at mismarks on relationship and sex for the various couple types in greater
detail. For couples with sex in error, we assessed which spouse/partner’s sex was mismarked, and for couples with
relationship mismarked, we looked at their sex composition. However, due to small sample sizes, we were unable
to draw conclusions.
7
  In preliminary analysis, we produced separate models for each of the four couple types. However, due to small
sample size for some couple types, we instead used couple type as an independent variable in the final models.
8
  Methodological documentation—including information on sample design and weighting—needed to assess the
statistical uncertainty of the information is accessible at the AHS methodology website
(http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ahs/tech-documentation/ahs-definitions--errors--historical-changes--
and-sample-design--.html).
                                                                                                                 9

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                        Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
RESULTS
What: Errors on Relationship Versus Sex
         In order to provide some context for the issue of relationship-sex inconsistency, we calculated
the inconsistency rate across all coupled households from the test panel. A tiny minority of coupled
households, at 1.2 percent, has conflicting responses on relationship status and couple members’ sexes.
Further, this rate does not differ statistically for those responding by telephone compared with those
responding via personal visit.
         Table 1, which contains information extracted from Lofquist and Lewis (2014), displays
relationship-sex inconsistency by couple type. As noted previously, inconsistency in reports of
relationship and sex is more common for couples reported as same-sex on the relationship item,
especially married same-sex couples, than for those reported as opposite-sex. Thus, although this issue
is rare among all coupled households, relationship-sex inconsistency appears to have a substantial
impact on same-sex married couples, as 55.9 percent of them has conflicting responses.
                                                                                                         10

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                               Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
                                                                                     1
       Table 1. Inconsistency in Reports of Relationship and Sex, by Couple Type
                                                                                       Standard
                                                                       Number or        Error of
                                                                         Percent        Percent
       Total same-sex married couples                                           213
         Consistent                                                           42.3             3.4
         Inconsistent                                                         55.9             3.4
         One or both missing                                                     1.9           0.9
       Total same-sex unmarried couples                                         237
         Consistent                                                           86.9             2.2
         Inconsistent                                                         12.7             2.2
         One or both missing                                                     0.4           0.4
       Total opposite-sex married couples                                   27,108
         Consistent                                                           99.1             0.1
         Inconsistent                                                            0.6             Z
         One or both missing                                                     0.3             Z
       Total opposite-sex unmarried couples                                  2,851
         Consistent                                                           98.1             0.3
         Not consistent                                                          1.8           0.3
         One or both missing                                                     0.1             Z
       1
         The results presented use unweighted data and may not fully account for the sample
       design. For this reason, some results could relate to the sample design.
       Z Rounds to zero.
       Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Housing Survey, 2013. Extracted from Lofquist
       and Lewis (2014).
         Results from a comparison of reported and probable sex for the four types of couples—reported
same-sex married, same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex married, and opposite-sex unmarried—appear in
Table 2. Looking first at couples reported as same-sex married on the relationship item, we see that 119
of these couples had opposite sexes marked on the sex item. We could not determine probable sex for
11 (9.2 percent) of these couples using the 2010 Census names directory. For an additional 26 (21.8
percent) of these couples, we could not discern probable sex due to name ambiguity.
         Of the 82 reported same-sex married couples for whom we could determine probable sex, none
were judged to be same-sex couples, meaning that the sex item was incorrectly marked. Indeed, all 82
couples were found to be opposite-sex couples based on probable sex, suggesting the relationship item
was mismarked. Thus, relationship-sex inconsistency for reported same-sex married couples is driven by
errors on relationship rather than sex. That is, these inconsistent cases are due to opposite-sex couples
whose relationship is incorrectly recorded as ‘Same-sex husband/wife/spouse.’
                                                                                                                11

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                            Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
    Table 2. Probable Sex of Couples with Inconsistent Reports on Relationship and Sex 1
                                                                                                  Standard
                                                                                                   Error of
                                                                           Number       Percent    Percent
    Total reported same-sex married couples with inconsistent sex                119       100.0
      At least one member lacks value for probable sex                             11         9.2         2.7
      At least one member has ambiguous name                                       26        21.8         3.8
      Subset of couples for whom probable sex can be determined                   82       100.0
       Probable sex is same-sex                                                     0         0.0         0.0
       Probable sex is opposite-sex                                                82      100.0          0.0
    Total reported same-sex unmarried couples with inconsistent sex                30      100.0
      At least one member lacks value for probable sex                              5        16.7         6.8
      At least one member has ambiguous name                                        4        13.3         6.2
      Subset of couples for whom probable sex can be determined                   21       100.0
       Probable sex is same-sex                                                     5        23.8         9.3
       Probable sex is opposite-sex                                                16        76.2         9.3
    Total reported opposite-sex married couples with inconsistent sex            156       100.0
      At least one member lacks value for probable sex                             30        19.2         3.2
      At least one member has ambiguous name                                       20        12.8         2.7
      Subset of couples for whom probable sex can be determined                  106       100.0
       Probable sex is same-sex                                                    15        14.2         3.4
       Probable sex is opposite-sex                                                91        85.8         3.4
    Total reported opposite-sex unmarried couples with inconsistent sex            52      100.0
      At least one member lacks value for probable sex                              6        11.5         4.4
      At least one member has ambiguous name                                       10        19.2         5.5
      Subset of couples for whom probable sex can be determined                   36       100.0
       Probable sex is same-sex                                                    26        72.2         7.5
       Probable sex is opposite-sex                                                10        27.8         7.5
    1
      The results presented use unweighted data and may not fully account for the sample design. For this
    reason, some results could relate to the sample design.
    Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Housing Survey, 2013.
         Turning to couples reported as same-sex unmarried on relationship, 30 of these couples were
marked as opposite sexes on the sex item. Of these 30 couples, in 5 (16.7 percent) at least one member
lacked a value for probable sex, and in another 4 (13.3 percent) at least one member had an ambiguous
name. Looking at the remaining 21 couples with information on probable sex, 5 (23.8 percent) of these
couples were likely same-sex, meaning that misreporting occurred on the sex item. The other 16 (76.2
percent) couples were judged to be opposite-sex based on probable sex, meaning that the relationship
item was misreported. These results indicate that this particular inconsistency, whereby a couple is
marked as same-sex partners on relationship but has opposite sexes marked, is caused by mistakes on
                                                                                                              12

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                        Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
both the relationship and sex item, although mistakes on relationship occur about three times as often
as those on sex.
         Looking next at couples whose relationship was reported as opposite-sex married, 156 were
reported as being of the same sex. Among this subgroup, 30 (19.2 percent) couples contained at least
one member lacking a value for probable sex, and in another 20 (12.8 percent) at least one member had
an ambiguous name. Focusing on the 106 couples with information on probable sex, 15 (14.2 percent)
were judged to be same-sex couples, indicating a mistake on the relationship item. The remaining 91
(85.8 percent) couples appear to be opposite-sex, meaning the sex item was misreported. Thus, in cases
where a couple’s relationship is recorded as opposite-sex married but same sexes are marked, the
mismark occurred on the sex item in a large majority of cases.
         Finally, there were 52 couples who were recorded as opposite-sex unmarried on relationship
but had same sexes marked. Of these couples, 6 (11.5 percent) contained at least one member lacking a
value for probable sex. In another 10 (19.2 percent) couples, at least one person had an ambiguous
name. Looking at the remaining 36 couples with information on probable sex, 26 (72.2 percent) appear
to be same-sex couples, indicating the relationship item was misreported. The other 10 (27.8 percent)
couples were judged to be opposite-sex using information on probable sex. These results suggest that
this specific inconsistency, in which a couple’s relationship is reported as opposite-sex unmarried but
same sexes are marked, is due to mismarks on both the relationship and sex item. However,
misreporting on relationship occurs about three times as frequently as misreporting on sex.
Who: Which Couples are Mismarked
         Inconsistent versus Consistent. In addition to describing couples’ mismarks on relationship and
sex, information on the characteristics of couples with mismarks is also useful. Table 3 presents results
from the logistic regression testing the likelihood of couples having inconsistent reports on the
relationship and sex items against having consistent reports. When looking at individual characteristics,
we assess the traits of the household respondent, as this was the household member playing the largest
role in reporting information. 9
9
  The householder was the respondent for 75.3 percent of couples.
                                                                                                         13

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                             Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
                                                                                                             1
 Table 3. Logistic Regression Predicting Couples' Likelihood of Inconsistent Reports on Relationship and Sex
                                                                                              Standard
                                                                              Estimate           Error Odds Ratio
 Reported relationship type (reference category is opposite-sex married)
   Same-sex married                                                             5.4972 ***        0.17     244.00
   Same-sex unmarried                                                           3.3471 ***        0.22      28.42
   Opposite-sex unmarried                                                       0.9775 ***        0.18         2.66
 Respondent age (reference category is 45 to 54 years)
   15 to 24 years                                                              -0.8537 *          0.36         0.43
   25 to 34 years                                                               0.1575            0.19         1.17
   35 to 44 years                                                              -0.0511            0.19         0.95
   55 to 64 years                                                               0.2295            0.20         1.26
   65 years and older                                                           0.2036            0.22         1.23
 Respondent Hispanic or Latino (reference category is not Hispanic              0.2448            0.18         1.28
 or Latino)
 Respondent foreign-born (reference category is native-born)                    0.0308            0.18         1.03
 Respondent education (reference category is high school graduate)
   Less than high school                                                        0.2093            0.23         1.23
   Some college or associate's degree                                          -0.0778            0.17         0.93
   Bachelor's degree or more                                                   -0.0372            0.16         0.96
 Number of people in household (reference category is 2 people)
   3 people                                                                     0.5450 ***        0.16         1.73
   4 people                                                                     0.2800            0.18         1.32
   5 or more people                                                             0.4233 *          0.20         1.53
 Returning household (reference category is nonreturning household)            -0.7138 ***        0.14         0.49
 Intercept                                                                     -5.2175 ***        0.22
 N                                                                              30,240
 1
   The results presented use unweighted data and may not fully account for the sample design. For this reason,
 some results could relate to the sample design.
 Significance is noted at the following: *(p<0.05); **(p<0.01); ***(p<0.001).
 Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Housing Survey, 2013.
          Looking first at the effect of reported relationship type, compared with couples reported as
opposite-sex married on the relationship item, inconsistent responses are more likely for reported
same-sex married, same-sex unmarried, and opposite-sex unmarried couples. These results confirm the
pattern observed in Table 1 above, in which inconsistent reports are most common for reported same-
sex married couples, followed in order by same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex unmarried, and opposite-
sex married couples. Couples marked as having an opposite-sex unmarried relationship are 2.7 times as
likely as reported opposite-sex married couples to have inconsistent responses on relationship and sex.
                                                                                                                 14

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                         Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
The odds of inconsistent reporting are still higher among reported same-sex unmarried couples (28.4)
and particularly those whose relationship was recorded as same-sex married (244.0).
         Age is another factor related to the likelihood of having inconsistent reports. Couples in
households with a young respondent are less likely to have inconsistent responses on relationship and
sex. Compared with respondents aged 45 to 54 years, couples with a respondent aged 15 to 25 years are
57 percent less likely to have inconsistent reports.
         Household size also relates to inconsistent reporting on relationship and sex. The odds of having
inconsistent reports are 73 percent higher for couples in 3-person households, compared with those in
2-person homes. Inconsistent reports are also more likely for couples in households with 5 or more
members, and the size of the effect is not statistically different from that for 3-person households.
However, this relationship is not observed for couples residing in 4-person households. Because the AHS
asks a number of demographic items, including relationship to householder and sex, of all household
members, the survey instrument grows in tandem with the household. For larger households, it
becomes easier for the respondent or interviewer to confuse which household member a question is
asking about, consequently increasing the chances of misreporting.
         Finally, couples in returning households are less likely than those in nonreturning households to
have inconsistent reports on relationship and sex. The odds of inconsistent reporting for couples in
returning households are about half as much as the odds for couples in nonreturning households. This
suggests that dependent interview is a useful tool for reducing reporting errors.
         Misreported Sex and Misreported Relationship versus Consistent. Above, we explored
characteristics associated with couples having inconsistent versus consistent reports on relationship and
sex. Here, we break inconsistent reports down further to assess the likelihood of specific reporting
errors. Table 4 presents results from the multinomial logistic regression testing the odds of misreporting
sex and misreporting relationship against having consistent reports.
         Focusing first on the odds of having sex misreported versus having consistent reports on
relationship and sex, we see an association with reported relationship type. Compared with couples
recorded as being in an opposite-sex married relationship, those reported as same-sex unmarried are
5.5 times as likely to have an error on the sex item. This means that these couples were recorded as
same-sex unmarried on relationship but marked as opposite sexes on sex, and were determined to be
same-sex using information on probable sex. The odds of misreporting sex do not differ statistically for
                                                                                                          15

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                              Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
couples marked as same-sex married or opposite-sex unmarried on relationship, compared with
reported opposite-sex married couples.
Table 4. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Couples' Likelihood of Misreporting Sex and Misreporting
Relationship 1
                                            Misreported Sex versus Consistent Misreported Relationship versus
                                                        Reporting                      Consistent Reporting
                                                          Standard                            Standard
                                             Estimate       Error    Odds Ratio   Estimate      Error Odds Ratio
 Reported relationship type (reference
 category is opposite-sex married)
   Same-sex married                         -11.0933         397.40           Z    7.5755 ***      0.30   1000.00
   Same-sex unmarried                         1.6984 ***        0.48       5.47    5.2254 ***      0.37     185.93
   Opposite-sex unmarried                    -0.2815            0.35       0.76    2.7063 ***      0.34      14.97
 Respondent age (reference category is
 45 to 54 years)
   15 to 24 years                            -0.5501            0.63       0.58   -2.0880 **       0.80       0.12
   25 to 34 years                             0.1449            0.30       1.16   -0.1631          0.33       0.85
   35 to 44 years                            -0.3259            0.34       0.72   -0.1586          0.31       0.85
   55 to 64 years                             0.4090            0.29       1.51    0.2076          0.35       1.23
   65 years and older                        -0.4748            0.38       0.62    0.9791 **       0.37       2.66
 Respondent Hispanic or Latino
 (reference category is not Hispanic or
 Latino)                                      0.3911            0.29       1.48    0.1248          0.32       1.13
 Respondent foreign-born (reference
 category is native-born)                    -1.0300 *          0.41       0.36    0.0673          0.36       1.07
 Respondent education (reference
 category is high school graduate)
   Less than high school                      0.7053            0.36       2.02    0.4923          0.41       1.64
   Some college or associate's degree         0.0697            0.29       1.07    0.3058          0.29       1.36
   Bachelor's degree or more                  0.1909            0.27       1.21   -0.1011          0.30       0.90
 Number of people in household
 (reference category is 2 people)
   3 people                                   0.1836            0.24       1.20    0.3915          0.31       1.48
   4 people                                  -0.5930            0.34       0.55    0.8979 **       0.32       2.46
   5 or more people                          -0.3321            0.35       0.72    1.2398 ***      0.33       3.46
 Returning household (reference
 category is nonreturning household)         -2.0397 ***        0.34       0.13    0.2662          0.22       1.31
 Intercept                                   -5.1670 ***        0.33              -8.2571 ***      0.44
 N                                                                          30,130
 1
   The results presented use unweighted data and may not fully account for the sample design. For this reason,
 some results could relate to the sample design.
 Z Rounds to zero.
 Significance is noted at the following: *(p<0.05); **(p<0.01); ***(p<0.001).
 Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Housing Survey, 2013.
                                                                                                                16

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                         Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
         A second demographic factor related to the risk of mismarking sex is respondent nativity.
Couples are 63 percent less likely to have sex misreported when the respondent is foreign-born versus
native-born. Recall that the analytic sample excludes couples who were interviewed in a language other
than English, so this nativity effect is independent of interview language.
         Finally, whether a household was a returning household is associated with the probability of
marking a couple’s sex in error. Misreporting sex is less likely for couples in returning households.
Having an error on the sex item is 87 percent less likely for couples in returning versus nonreturning
households. This is consistent with the operation of dependent interviewing in the AHS. For members of
returning households, information on sex was copied from a previous wave.
         Turning to the results for the odds of misreporting relationship against having consistent
reports, we see significant and substantial effects for reported relationship type. Compared with couples
reported as having an opposite-sex married relationship, all other reported types—same-sex married,
same-sex unmarried, and opposite-sex unmarried—are more likely to have had their relationship
mismarked. This association is particularly strong for couples reported as being in a same-sex married
relationship, who are 1,000 times as likely as reported opposite-sex married couples to have the
incorrect relationship marked. Thus, consistent with our findings from frequency distributions of
probable sex, there is a high probability that couples marked as having a same-sex married relationship
are actually opposite-sex couples whose relationship was mismarked. The odds of misreporting
relationship are also greater for couples reported as having a same-sex unmarried (185.9) or opposite-
sex unmarried (15.0) relationship.
         Reinforcing the findings for the likelihood of having inconsistent versus consistent responses on
relationship and sex, respondent age is associated with the odds of misreporting relationship. Couples
with respondents in the youngest age group, 15 to 24 years, are 88 percent less likely than those with
respondents aged 45 to 54 to have relationship mismarked. In contrast, the likelihood of having an error
on the relationship item is greater when the respondent is 65 or older (2.7). These age differences likely
relate to how familiar different generations are with same-sex relationships and related terminology.
Because legal recognition of same-sex marriage only began in 2004 in the United States, same-sex
marriage did not garner much attention during much of the life spans of older Americans. In contrast,
same-sex marriage has been a key issue during the formative years of young adults.
                                                                                                          17

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                        Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
         A third factor related to the chance of couples being misreported on relationship is household
size. Couples in 4-person homes, compared with those in 2-person households, are 2.5 times as likely to
have relationship mismarked. The likelihood of having an error on relationship is also greater among
households with 5 or more members (3.5). Recall that the AHS instrument is longer and more complex
for larger households. In these longer interviews, the respondent or interviewer may be more likely to
confuse which household member a question is asking about. It is also possible that respondents
become disengaged in longer interviews, or for the interviewer to go through the instrument more
quickly. In these ways, longer interviews can lead to more reporting errors.
CONCLUSION
         The Census Bureau strives to measure household and family relationships in a way that
accurately captures the complexity of and shifts in American family life. As same-sex couples have
gained greater recognition in recent years, the need for quality estimates of these couples has
increased. Currently, most Census surveys capture same-sex households indirectly using information on
relationship and sex from two separate questionnaire items. Census researchers have developed a
revised relationship question that also captures couples’ sex composition. Preliminary results from tests
of the revised item show that the new item alone does not eliminate errors in estimates of same-sex
couples (Lofquist and Lewis 2014). A particularly thorny issue is relative group size, in which estimates of
same-sex couples, particular same-sex married couples, are inflated by opposite-sex couples who are
misreported as same-sex (Cortina and Festy 2014; O’Connell and Feliz 2011).
         In this paper, we used 2013 AHS data using the revised relationship question to conduct a
detailed examination of inconsistency between couples’ reports of relationship (i.e., same-sex married,
same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex married, or opposite-sex unmarried) and their reported sex. We
delineate the what and who of relationship-sex inconsistency. Analysis comparing reported and
probable sex indicates that the relationship item is mismarked more frequently than sex. Misreports on
relationship explain relationship-sex inconsistency for the majority of couples whose relationship was
reported as same-sex married, same-sex unmarried, or opposite-sex unmarried. However, errors on sex
are more often responsible for inconsistent reports among couples marked as being in an opposite-sex
married relationship. Because opposite-sex married couples are the most numerous couple type, errors
on sex explain relationship-sex inconsistency for a substantial minority of couples overall.
                                                                                                          18

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                          Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
         These findings are generally consistent with the statistical issue of relative group size. Couples
with inconsistent reports on relationship and sex more frequently belong to the more numerous
group—opposite-sex couples—than to the smaller group—same-sex couples. The exception is for
couples marked as opposite-sex unmarried on relationship but as same-sex on sex, who are actually
same-sex in the majority of cases. In addition, our findings confirm previous research indicating that
estimates of same-sex couples, particularly same-sex married couples, are inflated by errors on the part
of opposite-sex couples (Banens 2013; Lofquist and Lewis 2014; O’Connell and Feliz 2011).
         Regarding which couples are more likely to have errors made on the relationship or sex items,
we find inconsistent reports to be most common for couples whose relationship was reported as same-
sex married, followed in order by reported same-sex unmarried, opposite-sex unmarried, and opposite-
sex married couples. This pattern is consistent with the findings of Lofquist and Lewis (2014). The same
pattern holds for errors specific to the relationship item. Once more, this points to the importance of
relative group size, as smaller groups are impacted more by mismarks on relationship.
         Respondent age, household size, and whether a household is a returning household are also key
factors for relationship-sex inconsistency. Respondent nativity has a limited impact, and Hispanic origin
and education are unrelated to inconsistencies. Older respondents are associated with mismarks on
relationship. It is likely that older respondents are more apt to make mistakes on the revised
relationship question due to lower levels of familiarity with issues and terminology pertaining to same-
sex couples. Indeed, for much of their lives, same-sex marriage was peripheral to mainstream politics
and culture. Also in line with this reasoning, both relationship-sex inconsistency and misreports on
relationship are less likely for younger respondents.
         Larger households were found to correlate both with higher odds of relationship-sex
inconsistency in general and misreported information on relationship in particular. Instrument operation
and length likely account for the positive relationship between household size and relationship errors. In
the AHS, demographic items including relationship to householder are asked of all household members.
In consequence, larger households have longer instruments, increasing the chance that the respondent
or interviewer could confuse which household member the present question is referring to. Longer
instruments can also lead respondents to become disengaged or for the interviewer to progress more
quickly through the instrument, thereby contributing to reporting errors.
                                                                                                            19

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                         Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
          Couples in returning households are less likely to have inconsistent responses on relationship
and sex, and are also less likely to have misreports on sex. This suggests that the use of dependent
interviewing in the AHS reduces errors as intended. Because information on sex but not relationship was
copied for members of returning households, dependent interviewing specifically lessened the
likelihood of misreporting on sex.
          Although the current study provides useful information regarding the what and who of
relationship-sex inconsistencies, it is not without shortcomings. The 2013 AHS has a large sample size,
necessary for studying small groups such as same-sex married couples. Despite this, however, the size of
groups being analyzed became smaller as we split them in various ways, including by misreporting type
(sex versus relationship item). These finer groups offer less statistical power for analysis. For example,
regression using larger samples of couples misreporting on sex and relationship may yield additional or
stronger relationships between misreporting and couple characteristics. In addition, we were limited in
terms of analytic detail. For instance, small group size prevented us from assessing whether the
characteristics related to relationship-sex inconsistency differ for various types of couples. We suggest
that, if and when possible, our research be repeated using a still larger survey sample in order to
confirm and expand our results.
          A second weakness of our study is that we cannot distinguish between misreporting on the part
of respondents and mismarks made by interviewers. That is, we are uncertain whether reporting errors
arise from the answers respondents provide or what the interviewers record. To better tackle this issue,
we suggest that future research on relationship-sex misreporting use a survey that collects data through
both self-administered and interviewer-administered modes. Because self-administered modes are free
from interviewer effects, comparing the two types of data collection would provide more information
on respondent versus interviewer effects. Results from the 2014 Census Test will allow such a
comparison. In addition, future research could use multilevel modeling to help isolate interviewer
effects.
          Limitations are inherent in our use of the statistical names directory and the 95 percent rule to
determine probable sex and whether relationship or sex was reported in error. As noted earlier, using
this method we were able to determine probable sex for only 68.6 percent of couples with inconsistent
reports on relationship and sex. Conclusions may differ if a less stringent threshold was used to
determine probable sex, or if an alternate method, such as administrative records, was used to verify
sex.
                                                                                                           20

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                         Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
         One benefit afforded by the revised relationship question is the allowance, in the case of
automated instruments, of soft edits that detect inconsistencies and potentially correct
misclassifications during data collection. Our current discussion of misreporting does not account for the
impact of the soft edits that appeared to interviewers in situations where an inconsistency between
relationship and sex was recorded. In future research, we plan to assess the effectiveness of the AHS
soft edits in reducing inconsistencies and correcting errors on relationship and sex. Another topic worthy
of future analysis is the characteristics associated with resolving relationship-sex inconsistencies through
the soft edits. It could also be worthwhile to explore whether error could be further reduced by making
the soft edits hard edits, meaning that inconsistencies would need to be resolved in order for the
instrument to proceed.
         Our results suggest a few steps that can be taken to decrease inconsistency on the relationship
to householder and sex items. One possible venue would be to educate interviewers about the issue of
relative group size and its relevance for estimating same-sex couples. Interviewers could be prepared to
ensure that respondents understand the revised relationship item and to answer questions about the
categories for opposite-sex husband/wife/spouse, opposite-sex unmarried partner, same-sex
husband/wife/spouse, and same-sex unmarried partner. This is particularly important for older
respondents.
         A second suggestion is to educate interviewers about data quality issues associated with longer
surveys for larger households, and to provide them with strategies to mitigate these issues. This action
would likely contribute to improved quality for a number of items across a variety of subject areas, in
addition to relationship measurement.
         A final suggestion is to continue using dependent interviewing on sex in order to reduce errors
on this item and mitigate relationship-sex inconsistency. It is also possible that dependent interviewing
on the relationship item would further mitigate inconsistency by decreasing errors specific to this item,
although this would need to be tested.
         The current research marks a substantial step in the process to improve measurement of
household relationships, particularly same-sex married couples. Although a revised relationship
question has decreased measurement error (Lofquist and Lewis 2014), inconsistent responses on
relationship and sex remain an issue. By providing detailed information on the nature of relationship-sex
                                                                                                          21

Measuring Same-Sex Couples                                                     Lewis, Bates, and Streeter
inconsistencies, our research will enable us to develop additional avenues for mitigating error, and lead
to improved estimates of same-sex couples.
REFERENCES
Banens, Maks. 2013. “Sex Miscoding and Same-Sex Miscoding Estimates.” Paper presented at the
        International Population Conference of the International Union for the Scientific Study of
        Population, August 28, Busan, North Korea.
Cortina, Clara and Patrick Festy. 2014. “Identification of Same-Sex Couples and Families in Censuses,
        Registers, and Surveys.” Working Paper 8(2014). Families and Societies: Stockholm University.
DeMaio, Theresa J., Nancy Bates, and Martin O’Connell. 2013. “Exploring Measurement Error Issues in
        Reporting of Same-Sex Couples.” Public Opinion Quarterly 77(S1):145-158.
Interagency Working Group on Measuring Relationship in Federal Household Surveys (MRFHS). 2014.
        “Improved Measurement of Household Relationships in Federal Surveys, Paper 1: Measuring
        Same-Sex Co-Residential Relationships.” Statistical Policy Working Paper. Federal Committee on
        Statistical Methodology: Washington, DC.
Kreider, Rose M. And Daphne A. Lofquist. 2015. “Matching Survey Data with Administrative Records to
        Evaluate Reports of Same-Sex Married Couple Households.” SEHSD Working Paper, 2014-36.
        U.S. Census Bureau: Washington, DC.
Lofquist, Daphne. 2011. “Same-Sex Couple Households.” American Community Survey Briefs, ACSBR 10-
        03. U.S. Census Bureau: Washington, DC.
Lofquist, Daphne and Jamie M. Lewis. 2014. “Improving Measurement of Same-Sex Couples.” Paper
        presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America, May 2, Boston, MA.
O’Connell, Martin and Sarah Feliz. 2011. “Same-Sex Couple Household Statistics from the 2010 Census.”
        SEHSD Working Paper, 2011-26. U.S. Census Bureau: Washington, DC.
                                                                                                        22

