
Recommendations for improving measurement of intimate partner relationships
Submitted to the Counting Couples, Counting Families conference, 19-20 July 2011
by Gary J. Gates
The influence of the decades-old concept of POSSLQs (People of the Opposite-Sex Sharing Living
Quarters) can still be evidenced in how measures of intimate partner relationships that occur outside of
marriage are conceptualized on surveys.1 The POSSLQ framework considers only different-sex couples
and only those who are residing together in the same household. Despite clearly representing a
subsample of possible forms of non-marital intimate relationships, this construct forms the basis for
how most surveys measure this construct. Assessments of non-marital relationships are largely limited
in scope to co-residential couples and few surveys take into account important conceptual and
methodological issues that should be considered in measuring same-sex couples.
In this essay, I will highlight challenges associated with how we conceptualize and measure intimate
relationships. The assessment focuses on a review of twelve publicly funded population-based surveys.2
The essay considers how social scientists might expand beyond current conceptualizations beyond
marriage and cohabitation to include a broader range of relationships, including those of same-sex
couples. The essay also highlight specific challenges, conceptual and methodological, associated with
measuring same-sex couples. This includes consideration of formal legal statuses like civil unions and
registered domestic partnership that are now available to both same-sex and different-sex couples in
several states.
Beyond marriage and POSSLQ: expanding the conceptualization of intimate partner relationships
The approaches used to assess the presence of intimate relationships and to measure the legal status of
those relationships are largely fixed in two paradigms, neither of which is grounded in an inclusive
concept of intimate partner relationships. The first paradigm constructs a framework whereby
relationships are largely divided into two types: marriage and everything else. The second paradigm
assumes that for the “everything else” relationships, a key component is co-residency in a household.
Of course, the reality of intimate relationships is much more complex than these paradigms. The
framework of marriage versus all other relationships forces a somewhat false dichotomy as we think of
the nature of these relationships. Manning and Smock (2005) observed that couples do not frame their
decision about union formation as marriage versus cohabitation but rather as cohabitation versus
remaining single. They also observe that cohabitation is hardly a binary condition. Non-married
cohabiting couples show substantial variation in the degree to which they co-reside. Variation in
cohabitation also exists among married individuals. An estimated five percent of married individuals in
the 2009 American Community Survey report that they are not separated and are not residing with their
spouse.
The current methods most frequently used to measure relationships seem restrictive and rarely allow
researchers to consider the totality of relationships outside of the structure of the household. They also
often lack conceptual clarity and conflate varied constructs for measuring relationships. I would posit at
least three distinctive conceptual constructs for measuring relationships:
1
  See Casper and Cohen (2000) for a review of the history of POSSLQ.
2
  American Community Survey (2000-2010), Consumer Expenditure Survey (2003, 2010), Current Population Survey (2000-2010), Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study: Birth cohort, Early Childhood Longitudinal Study: Kindergarten class, Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study,
Add Health: National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 79, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
97, National Survey of Family Growth (2006-2008), Survey of Income and Program Participation, and US Decennial Census (1990, 2000, 2010).
                                                                       1

         Nature of the relationship: What terms do individuals use to describe their relationships? This
         construct is potentially distinct from a household roster where respondents are asked if a
         husband, wife, fiancé, partner, boyfriend, or girlfriend is living in a household. A more inclusive
         construct designed to assess if respondents are in a relationship and what specific terms they
         use to describe that relationship would not depend on co-residency. Decoupling co-residency
         from measuring the existence of intimate relationships could provide more accurate
         assessments of both the presence and nature of such relationships.
         Relationship behaviors and co-residency: How do individuals interact with their relationship
         partners? These might include questions about resource allocation, like those used in the
         Consumer Expenditure survey, or co-residency behaviors included in Add Health. This would
         also include co-residency constructs captured in household rosters like those used in Census,
         ACS, or CPS.
         Legal status: How have individuals formalized their relationships legally? This would be akin to
         typical marital status questions but needs to include a wider range of legal statuses like civil
         unions and registered domestic partnerships.
Questions that measure these constructs certainly exist on a wide array of surveys. But surveys rarely
keep these concepts conceptually distinct. The vast majority of the surveys assessed for this essay
condition the identification of relationships on co-residency, either via a household roster or by asking
(as in the ECLS surveys) if partners, boyfriends, or girlfriends live in the household. Perhaps a more
obvious conflation of these constructs can be found in the marital status question used in the NSFG.
This includes the typical options of married, widowed, separate, divorced, or never married but also
adds an option for not married but living with a partner of the opposite sex. Setting aside for the
moment the obvious heterosexual bias of this question, it is also problematic in that the categories are
not mutually exclusive. The question stem reads “What is your current marital status?” It is entirely
possible that a respondent can simultaneously be living with a partner, currently married, divorced, and
widowed. But perhaps even more importantly, by adding the partner option, the question conceptually
veers away from assessing the current legal marital status of a person and instead adds an element of
assessing some type of non-marital relationship.
In most surveys, marriage is the only relationship form that is measured without regard to co-residency.
However, in the case of the American Community Survey and the decennial Census, the occupants of a
household can affect how marital status is actually coded. If the householder designates another person
as an “unmarried partner”, Census coding procedures do not allow either the householder or the
unmarried partner to be designated as “currently married” in the marital status question. If either
indicates that they are married, the response is subject to an allocation to another marital status. Again,
this procedure conflates two different conceptual constructs, legal relationship status of an individual
(which is not dependent on the presence of any other individual in the household) and how respondents
describe their relationships to other individuals in a household. Census procedures also do not allow for
the presence of multiple unmarried partners or spouses and do not permit households to include both a
spouse and an unmarried partner. Such procedures confine these relationship measures to very specific
parameters that largely narrow and perhaps somewhat distort our understanding of intimate
relationships.
In order to really begin to understand the totality of relationships, surveys must take greater care to
move beyond co-residency as a condition for the identification of relationships. They must also consider
designing questions with substantially more conceptual clarity so that researchers can compare and
                                                       2

contrast how individuals describe their relationships, how those relationships manifest themselves in
behaviors including co-residency, and what type of legal status those relationships may have.
Measuring same-sex relationships
The treatment of same-sex relationships in surveys marks a particularly problematic aspect of
relationship measurement. Some of the concerns in this regard are related to the issues of conceptual
clarity described above and to issues associated with measuring small populations. But much more
problematic is a hetero-normative perspective that seems to pervade relationship measurement
constructs. Another problem related to measuring same-sex relationships (but also potentially a
problem in the measurement of different-sex relationships) is the lack of any questions designed to
measure the increasing number of non-marital relationship recognition forms.
Methods used to identify same-sex couples in the decennial Census and ACS highlight both a general
lack of conceptual clarity about same-sex relationships as well as serious measurement problems.
Identification of cohabiting same-sex couples relies on both the household roster and the sex of
respondents. A same-sex couple is identified when a householder designates another person of the
same sex as a “husband/wife” or “unmarried partner”. Conceptually, the options of husband/wife and
unmarried partner are even more limiting to same-sex couples than to different-sex couples. This is
partly due to the complicated legal and social status of same-sex couples in the US.
Today, 15% of same-sex couples live in the six states (and DC) that permit them to marry.
Approximately 25% of same-sex couples live in the 14 states that offer various forms of non-marital
recognition including civil unions, registered domestic partnerships, and designated beneficiaries. Many
municipalities maintain domestic partnership registries for same-sex couples. Regardless of state and
local law, some religious communities will marry same-sex couples and the LGBT community has a long
history of conducting commitment ceremonies. There is no federal recognition of any same-sex
relationships. Given this history and legal complexity, terms like “husband/wife” and “unmarried” mean
different things to same-sex couples than to different-sex couples. If you were married and live in Iowa,
do you have a husband or wife if you know that you file your federal taxes as single? If a couple has had
a civil union and receives the equivalent of spousal benefits from their employer, are they really
“unmarried”? These terms are simply ill-suited to the realities of same-sex relationships.
Increasing the conceptual ambiguity, all same-sex couples are coded as “unmarried partners” in public
use microdata files and flags that would indicate any alteration of “husband/wife” couples to
“unmarried partner” are not included in these files. Further, Census Bureau procedures do not allow
“unmarried partners” to be “currently married” in the marital status question. This means that any
individual within a same-sex couple who indicates a status of “currently married” is recoded and
allocated to another status.
A further complication with this form of measurement concerns the possibility that different-sex
couples, who outnumber same-sex couples by roughly 100 to 1, occasionally miscode the sex of a
spouse or partner and are mistakenly coded as same-sex couples. Gates and Steinberger (2011) suggest
that as many as 30% of same-sex couples in the 2007 ACS and approximately 15% of same-sex couples
in the 2008 and 2009 ACS (when improvements were made to reduce miscoding) may be miscoded
different-sex couples and also offer methods to adjust data to minimize the error. However, as long as
survey options do not explicitly distinguish between same-sex and different-sex spouses or partners (as
the Canadian and UK Census options do), analyses of the Census and ACS same-sex couple data are
challenging and come with a variety of caveats.
                                                     3

For essentially the same reasons as described regarding the household roster, a typical marital status
question is also challenging for someone in a same-sex couple. This is likely to also become problematic
for different-sex couples. Civil unions in Hawaii and Illinois and domestic partnerships in Nevada (all
offering rights equivalent to marriage) are available to both same-sex and different-sex couples.
The fact that most surveys require that individuals in same-sex relationships use terms designed
primarily for different-sex couples to describe their relationships is indicative of a hetero-normative bias.
That bias is amplified when surveys actually restrict responses to explicitly describe different-sex
relationships while not providing comparable options to describe same-sex relationships. The NSFG
marital status question offers an example of this. It includes a response option of “not married but
living together with a partner of opposite sex” but offers no mechanism to indicate that the respondent
is not married but living with a same-sex partner.
Hetero-normativity in population-based surveys raises serious human subjects concerns. LGBT people
and same-sex couples routinely experience social stigma in their daily lives. Their families do not treat
their same-sex relationships as comparable to the different-sex relationships of siblings or other family
members. Employers routinely provide benefits to different-sex married couples that are not available
to same-sex couples. When surveys fail to provide options that allow same-sex couples to appropriately
designate their relationships or, even worse, when they explicitly only inquire about different-sex
relationships, this amounts to a reinforcement of social stigma. It signals to LGBT respondents that
same-sex relationships are not valued and are not actually comparable to different-sex relationships.
This is a concern that Institutional Review Boards should take more seriously.
Ten years ago, after California passed its first domestic partnership law, only 13% of Americans lived in a
state that offered any legal recognition for same-sex couples. Today, more than 40% of the US
population lives in a state with at least some form of legal recognition for same-sex couples and more
than one in ten Americans lives in a state that allows same-sex couples to marry. Surveys designed to
measure intimate relationships must begin to adapt to these changes. The Census Bureau has recently
conducted testing on alterations to both the household roster and marital status questions that would
improve measurement of same-sex couple relationships. This is a clear step forward, but the process is
still focused only on couples and essentially maintains a paradigm of using the household roster and
legal relationship status to measure relationships.
It seems self-evident that knowledge of a person’s sexual orientation and gender identity would be a
crucial component to understanding the nature of their intimate relationships. Yet of the surveys
reviewed for this essay, only Add Health and the NSFG include questions designed to measure sexual
orientation and none assess gender identity. The recent Institute of Medicine (2011) review of LGBT
health disparities observed that a detailed identification of specific gaps in LGBT health research was not
actually possible given the lack of population-based data that allowed for identification of LGBT
respondents. The review called for broad-based inclusion of sexual orientation and gender identity
measures in population-based surveys.
US Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius recently announced a
process for adding sexual orientation and gender identity questions to the National Health Interview
Survey and eventually other HHS surveys. Federal statistical agencies must follow the lead of HHS and
initiate appropriate steps for routinely including sexual orientation and gender identity questions on
population-based surveys. The absence of such data severely restricts the ability of researchers to
understand the totality of human relationships and reinforces a heterosexual bias in available research.
                                                      4

It limits the ability of social scientists to contribute in a meaningful way to the many public policy
debates about the role of government in sanctioning or restricting certain types of human relationships,
including those between same-sex partners.
Recommendations
In conclusion, I would offer the following recommendations for improving our ability to study intimate
partner relationships:
          Refocus the measurement of relationships away from marriage and co-residency and toward a
          broader concept of what constitutes intimate relationships.
          Develop methods of measuring relationships that offer greater conceptual clarity. The ability of
          individuals to describe a relationship should not be contingent on either co-residency or marital
          status and those constructs should be separated in survey questions.
          Develop methods of measuring legal relationship status that encompass emerging forms of non-
          marital relationship recognition including civil unions and registered domestic partnership.
          Develop methods of measuring relationships that are inclusive of both different-sex and same-
          sex relationships and allow for accurate measurement of both groups.
          Institutional Review Boards should consider the ramifications of hetero-normative relationship
          measurements on population-based surveys and challenge the conduct of research that
          potentially stigmatizes LGBT respondents.
          Include measurement of sexual orientation and gender identity as a standard demographic
          characteristic in population-based surveys, especially those focused on measuring intimate
          relationships.
References
Casper, LM, Cohen, PN. 2000. How Does POSSLQ Measure Up? Historical estimates of cohabitation.
          Demography 37(2): 237-245.
Gates, GJ, Steinberger, MD. 2011. Same-sex Unmarried Partner Couples in the American Community
          Survey: The role of misreporting, miscoding, and misallocation. Working paper presented at
          UCLA-California Center for Population Research and UC-Berkeley Population Center
          Miniconference on Census Microdata and Applications, UCLA, 3 June.
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. 2011. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
          Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding. Board on the Health of
          Select Populations, Institute of Medicine of The National Academies, The National Academies
          Press, Washington, DC.
Manning, WD, Smock, PJ. 2005. Measuring and Modeling Cohabitation: New Perspectives From
          Qualitative Data. Journal of Marriage and Family 67(4): 989-1002.
                                                          5

