NOTICE:       The copyright law of the United States
(Title 17, U.S. Code) governs the making of photocopies or other
reproductions of copyrighted material. Under certain conditions
specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a
photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specified conditions
is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be "used for any
purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research."
The CDC library absorbs the cost of copyright fees charged by
publishers when applicable and the cost of articles and books
obtained from other libraries. Copyright fees average $35.00 and
fees charged by the lending libraries are between $10 and $15 per
request

                                                     TSQ
Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender
Development, Implementation, and Analysis
            K Y L E G . K N IG H T, A N D R E W R . F L O R E S , a n d S H E I L A J . N E Z H A D
Abstract This article discusses research undertaken in the wake of Nepal’s 2011 federal census, the
world’s first to include a gender category in addition to male and female. It presents the methodology
and initial findings of a new survey of 1,178 sexual and gender minorities in Nepal conducted to
determine inclusive and locally relevant methodologies for demographic information gathering.
Nepal has legally recognized a third gender since 2007 and in 2011 added that category to the census.
However, due to confusion and discrimination among census enumerators and a data entry system
that only allowed for two genders, those who identified as third gender were not accurately measured.
Beyond those limitations, the term third gender is contested, and by itself it may not fully represent
the many sexual and gender minorities in Nepal, including people who are gender nonconforming.
This article discusses the development of new survey data measuring the identity, behavioral, and
attraction dimensions of gender and sexuality across different terms that are in use in Nepal. Initial
findings show that seven distinct groups of respondents can be described, and this article discusses
how to expand the concepts and considerations for inclusive data collection in Nepal.
Keywords Nepal, third gender, gender, survey research
T    he 2011 Nepali census was the world’s first to allow citizens to identify as a
     third gender (Shrestha 2011). However, as enumerator guidelines lacked
a definition of the category, some respondents who identified as third gender
reported being denied the opportunity to be registered as such by enumerators,
and many who were registered on the paper forms as third gender were lumped
into data sets disaggregated by male/female, because the analytical software the
government used only allowed two gender options (Knight 2012).1 Approximately
one year after initial analysis of the 2011 census was published excluding third-
gender-identified people (i.e., the results were disaggregated as male-female
only), the Williams Institute of University of California, Los Angeles, School of
Law partnered with Blue Diamond Society (BDS), a Nepali sexual health and
rights organization, to design and implement a survey for collection of data
about sexual and gender minority (SGM) identities in Nepal and to provide best
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly * Volume 2, Number 1 * February 2015                           101
DOI 10.1215/23289252-2848904 ª 2015 Duke University Press
                                   Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
102      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
practices for future inclusive survey design. The survey instrument focuses on
four key areas: demographics and socioeconomic status, self-identification with
sexual orientation and gender identity terms, experiences of discrimination, and
access to HIV services.
        This article focuses on the research conducted in Nepal in 2012 and 2013
and preliminary analysis of the data collected. We begin by providing the context
for legal establishment of Nepal’s third gender category. We then describe the
development of the survey instrument, the data collection, and initial analytic
results. Our analysis indicates seven distinct subpopulations among the assigned-
male-at-birth sample. We examine two variables within these subpopulations:
outness and experiences of discrimination. Due to limitations in the sampling
design, the assigned-female-at-birth sample was small and not included in the
current analysis.
The Legal and Social Recognition of a Third Gender Category in Nepal
The social and legal recognition of people who identify as and/or express non-
binary genders has occurred throughout history in a variety of cultural and
political contexts (Herdt 1996: 22). Scholars have explored in detail whether these
identity groups constitute a third gender category. Many identity groups do not
explicitly self-identify as third gender but define their identities behaviorally (e.g.,
being sexually penetrated) or relationally (e.g., being nonmale). As the majority of
research on gender-nonconforming people has been conducted on populations of
those assigned male at birth, it has been critiqued for doing a poor job of sepa-
rating the experiences of those assigned male and those assigned female at birth
(Valentine 2007: 156).
        Nepal’s contemporary third gender category is heterogeneous, reflecting
what anthropologist David Valentine understands as the spatial, temporal, and
cultural specificity of the very concepts of gender and sexuality that may be
“organized in very different ways and be understood through other kinds of
orderings” (165). A Nepali who was assigned male at birth described this cultural
ordering: “I am biologically male, but I am not a man. I do not desire women
sexually. Men in my culture desire women sexually. Therefore I am third gender”
(Bochenek and Knight 2012: 23). As legal scholar Holning Lau explained, “Some
identity categories in Nepal simultaneously convey an individual’s sex, gender
identity, sexual orientation, and preferred role in intimacy” (2013: 487).
        As sexual and gender minority activism swelled in public spaces, “third
gender” has been employed in Nepali political discourse. Over the course of
several years, a popular Nepali reformist politician referred to an opposition party
(the United Marxist-Leninsts, or UML) as “third gender” as an insult, suggesting
the party’s impotence (Adhikari 2013). The usage stuck in popular memory and
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                               TSQ
                KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD      * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender        103
was repeated years later—this time more symbolically —in a political cartoon
published after a group of activists led by an openly gay former parliamentarian
joined politics. It read: “365 third genders enter UML. Only now has our party’s
sex been assigned” (Knight 2014).
        Nepal first legally recognized a third gender category in 2007 when the
Supreme Court ruled in Pant v. Nepal: “Legal provisions should be made to
provide for gender identity to the people of transgender or third gender, under
which female third gender, male third gender and intersexual are grouped, as per
the concerned person’s self-feeling” (“Decision of the [Nepal] Supreme Court”
2008: 281). The judgment in Pant v. Nepal does not firmly define to whom the
third gender category refers. It references foreign legal precedent and the Yogyakarta
Principles and mentions “transgender,” “intersex,” and “homosexuality” in ref-
erence to the third gender category. In some instances the court distinguishes
between “homosexuals” and “people of the third gender,” but in other references
it employs the two terms together. The court specifically points to the census as a
method for inclusion in Nepali society: “According to the data published by
the Center Bureau of Statistics/Government of Nepal in 2005 . . . there are 102
identified races and castes in Nepal. . . . The male and female have been clearly
mentioned under the category of ‘sex’ in the data published by the Center Bureau
of Statistics whereas the identity of third gender has not been accepted there”
(278).
        This breadth and flexibility in the definition and the court’s direction to
determine legal gender based solely on self-identification perhaps created more of
a query than a directive; however, debates over who is included in the third gender
category remain unresolved. While thorough consideration of the social and
cultural construction of gender and sexuality in Nepal is beyond the scope of this
article, a brief discussion of identity dynamics is helpful to illustrate the com-
plexities of establishing the new (third) category in data collection efforts.
        Shivananda Khan’s explanation of a framework in India, similar to that in
Nepal, sheds light on sexuality and gender dynamics (as well as two of the terms,
kothi and panthi, used on our questionnaire):
        [The] gendered framework is constructed within a kothi/panthi dynamic, where
        the kothi perceives himself and his desire for other males in the context of gender
        roles in South Asia, i.e., the “penetrated” partner. Kothis construct their social
        roles, mannerisms and behaviors in ways which attract what they call panthis—
         “real men”—identifying as feminised males. In this context kothis are usually the
        visible MSM in a range of public environments and neighborhoods, but panthis
        are not, for they could potentially be any “manly” male. (Khan quoted in Cohen
        2005: 287)
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
104       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Explaining how such identities challenge the very distinctions between gender
and sexuality, Gayatri Reddy, in a reflection on her fieldwork in India, wrote: “My
persistent questions about the criteria for differentiating kotis from other men
almost always elicited the following answer: ‘all kotis desire pantis.’ This expla-
nation positions the identity category ‘koti’ as one not only understood or
expressed through gender non-conformity but also through sexual desire (and,
ostensibly, behavior) toward a distinctly gender-conforming category” (Reddy
2005: 47). As a result, such identity categories do not necessarily fall under a
sexuality or gender heading discretely and can simultaneously inhabit and
challenge both categories in various ways. As Sumit Baudh argued with regard to
hijaras in India, the term applies to male-assigned people and concerns gender
more than sexual identity, possibly including “men who cross-dress, castrated
men, or intersexed individuals. . . . A hijara’s sexual acts (for instance, with men)
therefore defy understanding of both heterosexual and homosexual” (Baudh
2008: 98).
        Metis and tas, two Nepali identity groups, identify in a similar dynamic,
with metis—the counterpart to kothis—being the principal target population for
BDS from its inception. The term meti is reported to have originated in Darjee-
ling, India, and is derived from the phrase “to quench one’s thirst,” with the
connotation that the role of the meti is to satiate men’s (sexual) desires (Tamang
2003: 240). Calling both ta and meti “social and porous construction[s],” political
scientist Seira Tamang noted: “Not all metis dress in drag. Indeed two metis
interviewed had tried it and said they didn’t really enjoy it. If they did dress in
drag, they only did it once in a while at the behest of friends” (241). In Nepal,
sexual and gender minorities, including metis and others who present as gender
nonconforming, do not necessarily present as such in all settings. Ethnographic
studies of metis in Kathmandu showed that a “high percentage” were married to
women (Boyce and Pant 2001). Some are open with their partners and fami-
lies, others are not. In this regard, we understand that the challenges of outness
and disclosure in Nepal’s context can lead people who identify with gender-
nonconforming identities to sometimes present as the gender they were assigned
at birth.
        In this context of multiple identities and types of expression, bureaucratic
implementation of the 2007 judgment’s third-gender category has barreled ahead.
Piecemeal achievements have included adding a third-gender tick box to voter
registration documents after 2008 and to citizenship documents in 2013. The most
widespread implementation of a third gender category, however, was the 2011
census. Nepal’s census was launched in June 2011, and forty thousand second-
ary school teachers were hired as enumerators. It was a politically charged event,
being the first since the end of a decadelong civil war that was bookended by
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
               KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD    * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender  105
populist uprisings and demands for an inclusive democracy. The census was
widely viewed as an opportunity to correct longstanding practices of government
exclusion (Thapa 2001). While inclusion of a third gender category was prom-
ising, technical issues and discriminatory enumerator behavior marred the pro-
cess and resulted in data that were only disaggregated by male and female, leaving
space for follow-up studies (Knight 2011).
The Blue Diamond Society and Williams Institute’s
Nepal Sexual and Gender Minorities Survey
The partnership between Williams Institute and BDS began in the aftermath of
the census, in light of both the desire of Nepali activists to have the SGM pop-
ulation counted and the lack of best-practices models from the region. The joint
effort developed a survey that allows respondents to self-identify using SGM
terms including and beyond “third gender.”
        Following initial consultations with BDS representatives, the Williams
Institute produced a questionnaire based on the set of four focus areas noted
above: socioeconomic status, inclusive and accurate identity terms, experiences of
discrimination, and access to HIV services. Questions were drawn from survey
instruments used to measure Nepal’s general population as well as from instru-
ments used elsewhere, which were selected for their relevance to the four focus
areas of the study and comparability to Nepali national data sets.2
        Survey administrators underwent a two-day training with Williams Institute
researchers and BDS team leaders who would supervise the survey administra-
tors during the implementation phase. A second field location–based “refresher
training” was led by BDS team leaders a month later, the day before the launch of
data collection in all five regions of the country.
        Four community consultations convened with Williams Institute researchers
and BDS representatives. The aim of these discussions was to revise and refine
the survey instrument and its translation; the final meeting indicated that
the survey construction was coherent and understandable. A text translator was
present for the first two meetings to receive feedback on his translation of the
survey instrument. During the remaining two meetings, issues of content were
debated, which not only led to revisions but also informed the survey adminis-
trator/interviewer training program. For example, during one of the consulta-
tions, a BDS staff member who identifies as third gender raised an issue about a
question on the survey (see appendix 1), that asked respondents to self-identify
with a range of terms on a sliding scale for each one, noting that strong identi-
fication should preclude identifying with more than one term.3 As the participant
explained, “Once someone answers positively [strongly identifying] with a term,
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                     TSQ
106      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
we can move to the next question. People cannot identify with more than one
term. If someone is TG [third gender], she cannot also be a lesbian.”
        The discussion sparked by this comment gestures at the language of gender
and sexuality identity in Nepal. Participants in that meeting debated whether
multiple identities existed or “were possible,” and various participants argued for
borders around the third-gender (tesro lingi) identity category to be understood
along presentation and appearance, while others asserted the category was more
comprehensive and based solely on identity (pahichaan). Another participant
explained: “I am a transgender woman by identity but I also call myself meti and
I have a wife so in some places because I appear as a man and do the duties of a
husband many people perceive me to be heterosexual.”
        English language identity terms used on the survey instrument were
translated in consultation with BDS. “Transgender” became tesro lingi, which
translates literally to “third gender.” During one community discussion, it was
raised that the direct and exclusive ascription of tesro lingo to “transgender
people” is contested by some, as the term is sometimes used to refer to all sexual
and gender minorities. However, participants agreed that the term most directly
corresponded with the English word “transgender” while not excluding those
who understood their identity —regardless of terminology —as a nonmale or
nonfemale third position. During discussions, participants asserted that because
there were multiple options for self-identifying, including an open-ended answer
space, those who wished to identify as tesro lingi (in Nepali) regardless of their
identification with “transgender” (in English) would be able to do so. It is worth
mentioning, however, that the Nepali tesro lingi in Deva Nagri script was listed
next to the English “transgender.” It was discussed whether the survey instrument
should include a transliterated “transgender” in Deva Nagri; however, partici-
pants argued that it was potentially confusing and might unfairly suggest the
superiority of English by transcribing it as such. It was noted by some participants
that after national consultations with BDS members and meetings with govern-
ment officials, in 2012 it was decided that on official documents henceforth,
“third gender” was no longer to be used. The term was replaced on documents by
“other” (anya), which was deemed more inclusive of gender-nonconforming
people, especially those who did not speak Nepali as their mother tongue (according
to census figures, only 48 percent of Nepalis speak Nepali as their first language).
Both “other” and “third gender” remain in use on official documents, depending
on when they were issued by the government; but community participants
agreed that using “other” on the survey instrument would not gather specific
enough data. These discussions and decisions informed the survey administra-
tor training program by calling attention to the need for repeated emphasis on
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
               KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD    * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender     107
self-identification as the core methodology for the survey, including people who
identified with multiple terms.
        Interviewers were trained to conduct interviews while sitting next to the
respondents and to use Nepali and English as well as other regional languages
where necessary. Portions of the questionnaire are shown in the appendixes.
        Question 16 (appendix 1) captured one of the three conceptual dimensions
of sexual orientation —self-identification —as defined by the Williams Institute
(SMART 2009). To supplement this information, we added questions that addressed
the other two dimensions, sexual attraction (appendix 2) and sexual behavior
(appendix 3). These questions used the same identity terms as the self-identification
question. For this study, we focus solely on responses to self-identification. The
importance of gathering information regarding identity, attraction, and behavior
about sexual orientation and gender identity is underscored by the fluidity and
hybridity of sexual and gender terms used in Nepal (as elsewhere), the diversity of
identities and experiences the third-gender category might capture, and the fact
that measuring any type of identity is complicated by cultural, spatial, temporal,
and privacy factors. In addition to collecting demographic information about
identity categories (the focus of this article), sexual behavior, and attraction, the
research team developed a series of questions related to experiences of discrim-
ination and practices of identity disclosure.
        Study procedures were approved by the UCLA Institutional Review Board.
Survey administrators were recruited from BDS’s drop-in center staff, as BDS felt
the people in these positions would have the broadest access to and under-
standing of local community networks of SGM. Five BDS staff members and
one staff member from the Federation of Sexual and Gender Minorities–Nepal,
an umbrella network of community-based organizations, were hired as team
leaders. Team leaders underwent an online ethical research certification program
through UCLA, and a summary of this material was included in the training
program for all survey administrators. After a pilot of fifty survey interviews was
conducted in Kathmandu in July 2013, the survey underwent a final revision.
Survey interviews were conducted during September and October 2013. Admin-
istrators approached people who accessed drop-in centers and through com-
munity networks, including with e-mail and SMS text message recruitment.
Participants were reimbursed 300 Nepali rupees (USD $3) for transportation.
Team leaders conducted a monitoring and evaluation mission to each of the five
development regions of Nepal and evaluated each interviewer’s initial ten com-
pleted surveys, giving feedback and authorizing continuation.
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                               TSQ
108        TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Table 1. Distribution of the current gender of the Nepal Analysis
Sexual and Gender Minorities Survey respondents
                                                         The final study has a sample size of
Current Gender              Sample Size          Percent 1,178 respondents.4 Respondents were
Third gender                     516             43.9%   asked to self-identify their current
Male                             391             33.3%
Male and other                   123             10.5%
                                                         gender in an open-ended question.
Female                            80               6.8%  Table 1 shows how all of respondents
Kothi                             22               1.9%  answered this question (including
Gay                               12               1.0%
                                                         male-born and female-born respon-
Lesbian                            6               0.5%
Mougiya                            6               0.5%  dents). Of the assigned-male-at-birth
Female and other                   5               0.4%  respondents who answered this ques-
Bisexual                           5               0.4%  tion, 44.2 percent (n = 446) identify
Intersex                           4               0.3%
                                                         as “third gender,” 38.5 percent (n =
Natuwa                             2               0.2%
Bisexual, Kinnar                   1               0.1%  388) identify as “male,” 12.1 per-
Hijara, Kinnar                     1               0.1%  cent (n = 122) identify as “male” and
Meti                               1               0.1%  another gender identity, and 5.3 per-
MSM                                1               0.1%
Total                          1,176              100%
                                                         cent (n = 53) identify with a variety
                                                         of other identity terms.
Note: Percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
                                                                  The limitation of using con-
                                                         venience sampling in this context is
that, by virtue of using a network of HIVoutreach workers, survey administrators
primarily recruited those who might benefit from these programs —people who
were assigned male at birth. In addition, people assigned female in Nepal expe-
rience layers of social exclusion that people assigned male do not necessarily
experience, meaning access to public life (including opportunities to participate
in research) can be limited for those assigned female (Rankin 2010; Forum for
Women, Law and Development 2011). As such, this sample reflects those people
assigned female at birth who were a part of or came in contact with HIV outreach/
LGBTI activism networks, which is not representative of the general population of
SGM who are assigned female at birth.
Citizenship Documentation Recognition of Nepal’s third-gender category on
citizenship certificates has been a central point of BDS advocacy since the 2007
judgment (see Al Jazeera 2013). Seventy-one (7.8 percent) male-assigned-at-birth
respondents report that they tried to change the gender on their citizenship
documents. Fifty-one (71.8 percent) of these respondents identify with gender-
nonconforming identities. Of respondents who report making an attempt to
change their documents, only four (5.6 percent) have been successful. They are
third-gender-identified people who were assigned male at birth.
Identification across Multiple Identities This article analyzes how respondents
identify with the multiple identity terms that the previously conducted community
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                                      TSQ
                  KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD           * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender              109
consultations determined to be relevant among SGM in Nepal. The survey pro-
vides an opportunity for respondents to select to what degree they feel an identity
label represents them. Responses range from not at all, to somewhat, to strongly.
Ten different labels are evaluated by the respondents, which creates 59,049 potential
combinations of response patterns. An initial question is whether we can reduce
these potential combinations to the observed response patterns. If so, then
respondents can be classified into discrete groups based on these patterns by using
multivariate statistics, and we use latent class analysis. We then make inferences
on these groups, including: the size of one group relative to the others, how
respondents in each group tend to self-identify, whether and when respondents
have specific patterns of identity disclosure, and unique experiences of discrimi-
nation connected to perceived nonconformity for each group.5 Our use of sta-
tistical models that incorporate the varying ways in which respondents may
identify in terms of gender identity and sexual orientation provides an opportunity
to examine whether, in Nepal, sexual orientation and gender identity may not be
mutually exclusive concepts. We do not address here the potential complexity of
multiple identities that may exist among other axes of identity such as caste, which
likely also relate to experiences of discrimination.
         The responses to question 16 are provided in figure 1.6 A majority of
respondents identify with terms associated with gender nonconformity—namely,
meti, kothi, or third gender. Very few respondents identify as ta, panthi, hijara,
heterosexual, or bisexual. What remains to be investigated is whether subsets of
the sample identify strongly with meti, kothi, and third gender, making them
Figure 1. Overall responses to question 16 of the Blue Diamond Society and Williams Institute Sexual
and Gender Minority Survey, asking respondents how much each identity label applies to them
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
110      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
potentially exchangeable categories, or whether there are subsets that do not
identify with these terms interchangeably.
        To reduce the number of potential combinations, we clustered respon-
dents using latent class analysis (LCA), which is a form of mixture modeling. The
respondents in this sample likely represent numerous subpopulations. Finite
mixture modeling is a process that examines, for example, whether respondents
who strongly identify as meti do also strongly identify as kothi and third gender
while not identifying with the other terms listed. If so, then respondents
who exhibit this pattern can be classified into one subpopulation. LCA uses the
responses to question 16 to evaluate all of the respondents in order to situate them
into distinct groups.
        This process provides a more detailed view of a sample of the sexual
and gender minority population in Nepal while permitting respondents to have
multiple attachments to identity labels. A note of caution should be expressed in
this analysis, as the number of subpopulations must be specified by the researcher
a priori or be model driven.7 We chose the latter option in this analysis, which
resulted in seven distinct subpopulations. Since the determination of the number
of classes is model driven, this type of analysis is considered exploratory. Though a
second study should be conducted to confirm the number of classes, we did
evaluate this finding by conducting two hundred replications of the analysis and
determining whether there were significant differences between the distributions
of the observed data and what would be predicted by the model. In this assess-
ment, we observed no difference between any of the replicated distributions and
the observed distribution.
        In figure 2, we provide the results of the LCA. Rows are grouped by the
likely response pattern of one of the seven classes. The bars represent the likely
response given by a member of that class to each of the identity items. We provide
names for each group along each row, determined by the likely response patterns
observed in figure 2. We also provide the estimated size of each group.
        The largest group in the LCA is one that we label “Strongly Gender
Nonconforming” because this group of respondents tends to strongly iden-
tify with each term that refers to identifying as gender nonconforming. The
respondents also have an open-ended question to indicate the term that they
primarily use to identify their sexual orientation or gender identity; 91.8 percent
of the respondents in this group primarily identify with gender-nonconforming
identities (e.g., third gender, meti, kothi, and/or hijara). This measure provides
some indication that the classification process accurately identifies this group.
Hijara is the only exception to the pattern in figure 2.
        We categorized another group as “Somewhat Gender Nonconforming.”
This group tends to somewhat identify with each of the gender-nonconforming
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
               KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD     * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender     111
terms (except hijara). We do observe some stronger identification with the third-
gender item relative to meti, kothi, or fulumulu, but the overall pattern of this
group is a weaker identification with gender-nonconforming labels relative to the
previous group. This group is 8.1 percent of the sample. We observe that 79.5
percent of the respondents in this group primarily use a gender-nonconforming
identity label, with third gender being the most common, followed by meti, then
kothi.
         The third group that is identified by the LCA represents a small group of
respondents who strongly identify with the gender-nonconforming identifiers
and have some identification with the labels heterosexual and bisexual. The
primary terms that respondents in this group use in the open-ended question are:
MSM, which refers to males who have sex with males (an HIV intervention term),
and third gender. This group makes up 3.5 percent of our sample.
         The next group that manifested in the data is particularly interesting
because the respondents in this group had some level of attachment to all of the
identity labels, except for hijara. We categorize this set of respondents as “Evenly
Affiliated.” Though the group makes up only 4.3 percent of the sample, these
respondents have a uniform set of attachments to multiple identities—even com-
binations that may seem contradictory, such as meti, kothi, and ta. In the open-ended
identity question, this set of respondents tends to primarily use third gender or MSM.
         The final group in the set of respondents who appear to have some
attachment to gender-nonconforming identity is the one that had greater levels of
attachment to particular gender-nonconforming labels over others. This group,
which we named “Third Gender/Meti,” makes up 11.3 percent of the sample, and
the respondents in this group tend not to identify heavily with kothi or at all with
fulumulu as labels representing them. Of the respondents in this group, 94.7
percent primarily identify as third gender or meti.
         Alongside the respondents who have varying levels of attachment to
gender-nonconforming identity labels, there are two groups in the data where
respondents identify more strongly with gender-conforming identities. The
respondents belonging to the first of these groups (“Gay Identified”) tend to more
strongly identify as gay. This group makes up 16.8 percent of the sample, and 94.9
percent of the respondents in this group name their primary identity as gay,
bisexual, or MSM. The second group of respondents (“Ta Identified”) makes up 9
percent of the sample, and this group tends to strongly identify with a ta identity.
Those who identify as ta are traditionally known to be gender-conforming men
who have penetrative sex with men or gender-nonconforming people assigned
male at birth. We find that 91.3 percent of the respondents in this group name their
primary identity as gay, bisexual, or MSM.
                              Published by Duke University Press

                               TSQ
112 TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
                Published by Duke University Press

                             TSQ
KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD    * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender              113
                      Figure 2. The seven groups from the latent class
                      analysis of the Nepal Sexual and Gender Minorities
                      Survey. Column of identifiers represents identity
                      questions asked in question 16. Bars represent the
                      likely responses of respondents in that group to each
                      identity question.
                                We find in this analysis a confirma-
                      tion of what was discussed in the earlier
                      meetings and in previous studies. There are
                      many different terms that gender and sexual
                      minorities use in Nepal, and they have
                      varying levels of attachment to some terms
                      over others. The potential for respondents to
                      indicate multiple attachments to these labels
                      compels us to use analytic techniques that
                      explicitly incorporate all of these potential
                      attachments. We note that the Third Gender/
                      Meti group is an indication of a subpopu-
                      lation in the data that would be overlooked
                      in other data collection efforts if surveys relied
                      on a single term such as kothi to measure the
                      gender-nonconforming population in Nepal.
                      By our analysis, such occurrences would
                      potentially undercount the sexual and gen-
                      der minority population by 11.3 percent. We
                      should note that this sample is not intended
                      to be representative of the sexual and gender
                      minority population in Nepal, but it does
                      provide greater insight.
                                A majority of our respondents tend
                      not to strongly identify with both gender-
                      nonconforming identities and gender-
                      conforming identities simultaneously. This
                      indicates that one’s sexual orientation and
                      gender identity may not be discrete in the
                      Nepal context, which has been discussed
                      in previous qualitative studies (e.g., Lau
                      2013). In bivariate analyses of these identity
                      terms, there is consistently a negative rela-
                      tionship between strongly identifying with
           Published by Duke University Press

                                        TSQ
114       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
gender-nonconforming labels and strongly identifying with gender-conforming
labels.
Disclosure and Visual Nonconformity As a further indication of how these groups
allow for reasonable and insightful inference on our sample of SGM in Nepal, we
examine a set of questions regarding the level of identity disclosure, or “outness,”
that the respondents report having in multiple venues. If we observe distinct
patterns of outness by the seven subpopulations, then we have some confirmation
that the LCA may indicate that the experiences of SGM are not necessarily uni-
form. Each outness question asks respondents how many people know about
their sexual orientation and/or gender identity at (1) home, (2) work, and (3)
school; and (4) whether their supervisor knows. Respondents select among five
options: none, a few, some, most, or all (except for the supervisor item, which is a
yes-or-no question).
        As plotted in figure 3, a clear distinction emerges in outness patterns among
the groups that have a degree of identification with gender-nonconforming terms
versus the gender-conforming “Gay Identified” and “Ta Identified” groups. The
respondents in the gender-nonconforming groups tend to report higher levels of
outness than respondents in the Gay and Ta groups. We do observe variation across
venues, with third gender respondents who attend school reporting less outness
than third gender respondents who have occupations.8 The patterns are quite
distinct, and they suggest that respondents who identify more strongly with gay or
ta are less likely to be out than respondents who more strongly identify with
gender-nonconforming identity terms.
        Being perceived as visually conforming may reduce experiences of dis-
crimination among gender and sexual minorities (Grant, Mottet, and Tanis 2011:
27). We compare how a respondent’s outness corresponds with the likelihood that
they report not facing discrimination because they were perceived as heterosexual
and/or gender conforming in certain settings. Outness may decrease or increase
the risk of experiencing discrimination: in the US context, coming out may be
empowering while at the same time could result in experiences of workplace or
social discrimination (Grant et al.: 28). We investigate visual nonconformity by
analyzing a series of questions regarding whether respondents face discrimination
or abuse in seven areas: (1) at a store or market, (2) in a transit system (e.g., bus,
airplane), (3) in a hospital or clinic, (4) by a police officer or station, (5) by a judge,
(6) by a government office or agency, and (7) by a school or college. Respondents
choose from a series of options to describe whether they faced discrimination, and
if not, why they did not. Some respondents report not experiencing discrimi-
nation because people in that setting do not know about their sexual orientation
and/or gender identity; that is, they are perceived as visually conforming. We find
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                                      TSQ
                   KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD          * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender             115
Figure 3. Levels of outness across multiple venues by the full sample and the seven groups from the
latent class analysis of the Nepal Sexual and Gender Minorities Survey. GNC = gender nonconforming.
differences in how outness relates to perceived conformity among the groups.
Respondents in the groups Strongly Gender Nonconforming and Somewhat
Gender Nonconforming who are out to more people at home are less likely to
report not experiencing discrimination while at the market due to perceived
conformity. About half of the respondents in the Gay and Ta groups report not
                                    Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
116       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
facing discrimination at a store or market, and there is no clear relationship
between outness at home and not experiencing discrimination. We observe a
somewhat negative relationship between outness and not facing discrimination
due to perceived conformity for the respondents belonging to the group Strongly
Gender Nonconforming (Kendall’s t = - .22) and the group Somewhat Gender
Nonconforming (Kendall’s t = - .33). This indicates that in this context, respon-
dents in the group Strongly Gender Nonconforming who are out to everyone at
home rarely report not facing discrimination at a market due to perceived visual
conformity.
        We investigate the relationship between the multiple forms of outness and
tendency to report not facing discrimination due to perceived visual conformity
for the seven areas of social life.9 While in some instances there is a relationship
between levels of disclosure and experiences of discrimination, many of the
relationships are not statistically significant. On average fewer than half of the
respondents of any group report not experiencing discrimination due to per-
ceived conformity. We also observe that the gap between the “Ta” and “Gay”
groups in relation to the other groups tends to remain. We find that, in many areas
of social life, those who are less likely to report not facing discrimination due
to perceived visual conformity are those who have a stronger identification to
gender-nonconforming identities.
        We find that the LCA groups do offer additional insight into the experi-
ences of sexual and gender minority people in our sample. We observe distinct
levels of outness for each group by each of the venues. This also indicates that data
collection efforts that administer surveys only in households may potentially
undercount the population of sexual and gender minority people in Nepal. The
respondents who do not belong to the groups “Strongly Gender Nonconforming”
or “Somewhat Gender Nonconforming” tend to be less out at home, meaning that
depending on survey administration processes, it is reasonable to expect a survey
to miss sexual and gender minorities in its count. Alongside observing varying
levels of outness, we find that it is highly unlikely for gender-nonconforming
respondents to report that they did not face discrimination due to perceived visual
conformity, and while the same is true for cisgender gay respondents, there is a
measurable difference in how many report visual conformity as a reason for not
experiencing discrimination.
Limitations
As noted earlier, the generalizability and applicability of this sample are limited
due to its bias in the sampling procedure. Because the survey outreach strategy
was conducted from HIV service provider offices, which have a primarily male-
assigned-at-birth clientele, a very small proportion of our sample is female-
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
               KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD    * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender    117
assigned-at-birth respondents. Therefore, our analysis is limited to people who
were assigned male or intersex at birth. For the purposes of this article, we have
decided not to analyze data about female-assigned respondents because that
sample was small, and combining it with the male-assigned sample could
potentially lead to conclusions that would be inconsistent if we analyzed them
separately.
         We chose to limit the focus of this article to the methodology of collecting
data on sexual and gender minority identities in Nepal and the correlation of
these demographic factors to identity disclosure and experiences of discrimina-
tion. Although the discrimination question explicitly asks about discrimination
related to sexual or gender minority status, the authors recognize that socioeco-
nomic or other factors may affect the likelihood that a person experiences dis-
crimination, and these factors would be important to include in a broader
analysis of these data.
Recommendations
This study demonstrates the importance of community engagement (Tindana
et al. 2007) and the early and frequent involvement of representatives from, in this
case, sexual and gender minority communities to create an inclusive and nuanced
survey instrument. Community consultations, particularly those that discussed
translation and terminology, provided crucial feedback—ranging from discus-
sions of sexual and gender identity language to decisions on how to phrase and
order other elements in the survey. Repeated engagement with Nepali partners
during the translation and revision process led to increased mutual ownership of
the survey instrument design process and accuracy and applicability of the lan-
guage used. Every small adjustment carried significant meaning for those
involved in the process. For example, after two rounds of translation, it was
requested that Nepali sexual orientation and gender identity terms be put at the
top of the list in question 16 (appendix 1), because listing English terms such as
“Gay and Lesbian” higher sent a message that those terms should be prioritized.
         The design, implementation, and analysis process of this project suggests
that future national surveys in Nepal, such as the 2021 Population and Housing
Census, can be inclusive of SGM beyond adding a third column in the gender
section—regardless of what it is called. In order to take into account the variety of
ways in which Nepali people experience and express sexuality and gender, officials
involved in designing survey instruments should consult with representa-
tives from sexual and gender minority groups. Definitions provided for survey
implementation staff should acknowledge the diversity among sexual and gender
minority populations. Training programs should contextualize the reasons for
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                          TSQ
118       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
asking the questions, normalize the process of asking, involve briefings on ter-
minology, and explain special considerations for identity disclosure, such as
privacy while interviewing (SMART 2009).
         The findings of the LCA reinforce the observation that many SGM tend to
not identify with a single identity term. Instead, of the seven distinct groups that
emerged, five identified with gender-nonconforming identities and two identified
with gender-conforming “Gay” and “Ta” identities. The “Evenly Affiliated” group
indicates that it is possible to display the same level of association with multiple
identities. Although this group was a small part of our sample, it provides an
important reminder that SGM may not fit into, or remain in, discrete identity
categories.
         The distinctions among experiences of identity-based subgroups are
important considerations for service providers and government offices engaged in
programming with SGM populations. For example, interventions that focus on
same-sex behavior (e.g., HIV prevention) need to consider ways to reach people
using messaging that does not necessarily invoke tesro lingi or other SGM ter-
minology in order to reach people who are not open about their identity or do not
identify with any specific term. Experiences of discrimination in public places and
bias against gender-nonconforming people should be similarly considered when
designing programs and advocacy strategies. Refined data collection methods will
enable civil society groups and policy makers to adequately serve and track the
progress of SGM across various social-welfare contexts.
Kyle G. Knight was a 2012–14 visiting international fellow at the Williams Institute, UCLA
School of Law. He lived and worked in Nepal for more than three years.
Andrew R. Flores, PhD, is public opinion and policy fellow at the Williams Institute, UCLA
School of Law.
Sheila J. Nezhad is a Public Policy Fellow at the Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law. She
holds a master’s of development practice degree from the University of Minnesota.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported in part by the United Nations Development Programme under the
Multi-Country South Asia Global Fund Programme (MSA-910-G02-H) and by the Norwegian
Embassy in Nepal. We are very thankful to Jody L. Herman, Brad Sears, the anonymous reviewers,
and the editors for their comments and recommendations on previous versions of this article. Any
remaining errors are our own.
                          Published by Duke University Press

                                                  TSQ
               KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD          * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender              119
Notes
1.    “Third gender” is sometimes used to refer to gender-nonconforming people and
      sometimes as an umbrella term to refer to the many sexual and gender minority identities
      in Nepal, either specifically or symbolically (Pant v. Nepal, Writ No. 917 of the Year 2064
      BS [AD 2007], translated in NJA Law Journal 2008 at 262). That is, in some instances
      “third gender” (tesro lingi in Nepali) is translated to mean “transgender” specifically; in
      other instances, it includes a range of sexual and gender minorities (there is only one
      word for sex/gender in Nepali, lingi).
2.    The full questionnaire and question sources are available from Andrew R. Flores upon
      request.
3.    It should be noted that question 16.1 allowed respondents to list any term they preferred,
      whether it was listed in question 16 or not.
4.    Forty-seven cases were dropped because they were incomplete. The data have been
      translated by BDS team leaders and entered into SurveyMonkey software in Nepal.
      Researchers at the Williams Institute have downloaded the data for analysis. Data
      cleaning and summary statistics are conducted using STATA 13.0 (College Station, TX).
      Multivariate analyses are performed in Mplus (Muthén and Muthén 1998–2014), and the
      R package poLCA is used to confirm the multivariate analyses (Linzer and Lewis 2011).
5.    We use the terms perceived nonconformity and perceived conformity as language to
      describe whether respondents believe instances of discrimination are due to the per-
      ception of others as viewing the respondent as a gender and/or sexual minority. We
      borrow and slightly modify these terms from Jaime M. Grant, Lisa A. Mottet, and Justin
      Tanis (2011), who use visual nonconformity as a term to describe “whether respondents
      believed their gender presentation matched their gender identity” (27).
6.    We focus solely on respondents who had male sex assigned at birth. The size of our
      female-sex-assigned-at-birth sample would make it unreasonable to include them in this
      analysis, as this would lead to conceptual stretching in this case. We will discuss and
      provide results for that subset of the sample in our subsequent studies.
7.    The model-driven approach selects the number of classes that minimizes the Bayesian
      Information Criterion (BIC) to its lowest level. The BIC is an estimate that examines how
      well a model explains the variation present in the data while issuing a penalty for too many
      parameters. This approach has been validated as a reliable way to determine the number of
      classes in an LCA (Nylund, Asparouhov, and Muthén 2007). We conducted the initial LCA
      in Mplus version 7 (Muthén and Muthén 1998–2014) and reconducted it in poLCA to
      confirm the findings (Linzer and Lewis 2011). The BICs for the separate LCAs are: two
      classes 13469.137, three classes 12716.438, four classes 12473.018, five classes 12379.387, six
      classes 12307.614, seven classes 12272.76, eight classes 12339.767, and nine classes 12395.734.
8.    Note that not all respondents attend school or have occupations, so sample sizes vary
      across venues. The smallest sample is of respondents who are in school, which increases
      the instability of those estimates.
9.    To estimate these rates, the R package poLCA (Linzer and Lewis 2011) was again used to
      estimate the bivariate relationship. The analysis applies LCA to generate reliable esti-
      mates in highly stratified contingency tables (Linzer and Lewis 2011). For each estimate,
      we identify the modal response that each of the seven classes would give to each of
      the identity questions, and we then estimate the bivariate contingency table for the
      relationship between disclosure and not facing discrimination due to perceived visual
      conformity. Contact Andrew R. Flores for full results.
                              Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
120        TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
References
Adhikari, Gyanu. 2013. “Family Matters.” Kathmandu Post, February 25. www.ekantipur.com/the
         -kathmandu-post/2013/02/25/related_articles/family-matters/245712.html.
Al Jazeera. 2013. “Citizenship Cards for Nepal’s ‘Third Gender.’” February 5. www.aljazeera
         .com/video/asia/2013/02/20132518501198693.html.
Baudh, Sumit. 2008. “Human Rights Interrupted: An Illustration from India.” In Development
         with a Body: Sexuality, Human Rights, and Development, edited by Andrea Cornwall,
         Sonia Corrêa, and Susie Jolly, 93–107. New York: Zed.
Bochenek, Michael, and Kyle Knight. 2012. “Establishing a Third Gender Category in Nepal:
         Process and Prognosis.” Emory International Law Review 26, no. 1: 11–41.
Boyce, Paul, and Sunil Pant. 2001. “Rapid Ethnography of Male to Male Sexuality and Sexual
         Health—Kathmandu, Nepal.” Family Health International. www.hivpolicy.org/Library
         /HPP000564.pdf.
Cohen, Lawrence. 2005. “The Kothi Wars: AIDS Cosmopolitanism and the Morality of Classifi-
         cation.” In Sex in Development: Science, Sexuality, and Morality in Global Perspective,
         edited by Vincanne Adams and Stacy Leigh Pigg, 269–303. Durham, NC: Duke University
         Press.
“Decision of the [Nepal] Supreme Court on the Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transsexual, and
         Intersex (LGBTI) People [Pant v. Nepal].” 2008. NJA Law Journal 2, no. 1: 261–86. www
         .gaylawnet.com/laws/cases/PantvNepal.pdf.
Forum for Women, Law, and Development. 2011. “Shadow Report on the Fourth and Fifth
         Periodic Report by the Government of Nepal on CEDAW.” www2.ohchr.org/english
         /bodies/cedaw/docs/ngos/FWLD_NepalCEDAW49.pdf.
Grant, Jaime M., Lisa A. Mottet, and Justin Tanis. 2011. “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the
         National Transgender Discrimination Survey.” National Center for Transgender Equality
         and National Gay and Lesbian Taskforce. www.thetaskforce.org/downloads/reports
         /reports/ntds_full.pdf.
Herdt, Gilbert. 1996. Third Sex, Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History.
         New York: Zone.
Knight, Kyle. 2011. “What We Can Learn from Nepal’s Inclusion of ‘Third Gender’ on Its Census.”
         New Republic, July 18. www.newrepublic.com/article/world/92076/nepal-census-third
         -gender-lgbt-sunil-pant.
———. 2012. “Dividing by Three: Nepal Recognizes a Third Gender.” World Policy Institute,
         World Policy (blog), February 1. www.worldpolicy.org/blog/2012/02/01/dividing-three
         -nepal-recognizes-third-gender.
———. 2014. “The Spark: How Sunil Pant Ignited a Queer Rights Movement in Nepal.” Caravan,
         March 1. www.caravanmagazine.in/reportage/spark.
Lau, Holning. 2013. “Law, Sexuality, and Transnational Perspectives.” Drexel Law Review 5, no. 2:
         479–95. drexel.edu/*/media/Files/law/law%20review/Spring-2013/Lau.ashx.
Linzer, Drew A., and Jeffrey B. Lewis. 2011. “poLCA: An R Package for Polytomous Variable Latent
         Class Analysis.” Journal of Statistical Software 42, no. 10: 1–29.
Muthén, Linda K., and Bengt O. Muthén. 1998–2014. Mplus User’s Guide. 7th ed. Los Angeles:
         Muthén and Muthén.
Nylund, Karen L., Tihomir Asparouhov, and Bengt O. Muthén. 2007. “Deciding on the Number
         of Classes in Latent Class Analysis and Growth Mixture Modeling: A Monte Carlo
         Simulation Study.” Structural Equation Modeling 14, no. 4: 37–41.
                         Published by Duke University Press

                                                      TSQ
                   KNIGHT, FLORES, and NEZHAD          * Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender        121
Rankin, Katharine. 2010. “Cultures of Economies: Gender and Socio-spatial Change in Nepal.”
          Gender, Place, and Culture 10, no. 2: 111–29.
Reddy, Gayatri. 2005. With Respect to Sex. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shrestha, Manesh. 2011. “Nepal Census Recognizes ‘Third Gender.’” CNN, May 31. edition.cnn
          .com/2011/WORLD/asiapcf/05/31/nepal.census.gender.
SMART (Sexual Minority Assessment Research Team). 2009. “Best Practices for Asking Questions
          about Sexual Orientation on Surveys.” Williams Institute. williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu
          /research/census-lgbt-demographics-studies/best-practices-for-asking-questions-about
          -sexual-orientation-on-surveys.
Tamang, Seira. 2003. “Patriarchy and the Production of Homo-erotic Behavior in Nepal.” Studies
          in Nepali History and Society 8, no. 2: 225–58. martinchautari.org.np/files/2_%20Seira
          %20Tamang.pdf.
Thapa, Deepak. 2001. “Ties That Bind.” Kathmandu Post, July 21. www.ekantipur.com/2011/07/21
          /related-article/ties-that-bind/337746.html.
Tindana, Paulina O., et al. 2007. “Grand Challenges in Global Health: Community Engagement in
          Research in Developing Countries.” PLoS Medicine 4, no. 9: e273.
Valentine, David. 2007. Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category. Durham, NC: Duke
          University Press.
Appendix 1. Question 16 from the Nepal Sexual and Gender Minorities Survey, asking respondents
how they identify (English and Nepali)
16   There are many terms               Meti
     people use to identify             not at all somewhat strongly
     their sexual orientation           Ta
     and gender identity.               not at all somewhat strongly
     Now I am going to read             Kothi
     some terms to you and              not at all somewhat strongly
     I’d like to know to which
                                        Panthi
     degree do the following
                                        not at all somewhat strongly
     terms apply to you?
                                        Hijara
     For each term you must
                                        not at all somewhat strongly
     answer “not at all”
     “somewhat”or “strongly”            Fulumulu
     (circle answers)                   not at all somewhat strongly
                                        Transgender
                                        not at all somewhat strongly
                                        Gay or lesbian
                                        not at all somewhat strongly
                                        Heterosexual or straight
                                        not at all somewhat strongly
                                        Bisexual
                                        not at all somewhat strongly
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
122        TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Appendix 2. Question 17 from the Nepal Sexual and Gender Minorities Survey, asking respondent
about their sexual attraction (English and Nepali)
17   People are different in their sexual              Metis
     attraction to other people. Which best            Kothis
     describes your feelings? Are you attracted        Panthis
     to? (multiple answers possible)                   Hijaras
                                                       Males
                                                       Females
                                                       Transgender men
                                                       Transgender women
                                                       Other
Appendix 3. Question 18 from the Nepal Sexual and Gender Minorities Survey, asking respondents
about their sexual behavior (English and Nepali)
18    In the past 12 months, who have you had         Metis
      sex with? (multiple answers possible)           Kothis
                                                      Panthis
                                                      Hijaras
                                                      Males
                                                      Females
                                                      Transgender men
                                                      Transgender women
                                                      Other
                                                      I have not had sex
                           Published by Duke University Press

