NOTICE:       The copyright law of the United States
(Title 17, U.S. Code) governs the making of photocopies or other
reproductions of copyrighted material. Under certain conditions
specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a
photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specified conditions
is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be "used for any
purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research."
The CDC library absorbs the cost of copyright fees charged by
publishers when applicable and the cost of articles and books
obtained from other libraries. Copyright fees average $35.00 and
fees charged by the lending libraries are between $10 and $15 per
request

                                                     TSQ
The (Mis)Measure of Trans
                                     C H R IS T I N E L A B U S K I a n d C O LTO N K E O - M E I E R
Abstract This essay considers the utility of research questions that articulate aspects of transgender
lives to the nontransgender populations with whom they share a wide range of bodily and lived
experience. By foregrounding transgender’s instability as a research variable, the authors argue for
more precise methodological orientations in trans research, particularly regarding gender and sexual
orientation. Drawing on their own data with trans men whose sexual attractions have shifted during
transition, they argue against unidimensional interpretations of this experience. Feminists and
critical race scholars suggest that race and gender frequently function as “proxies”: variables that
reduce the complexities of biosocial bodily experience to more quantifiable forms of data. The authors
argue that much of the research conducted with transgender persons suffers from similar reductions,
narrowing the epistemological frameworks through which these populations are subsequently
investigated and understood. By contrasting the National Transgender Discrimination Survey’s focus
on the measurable experience of discrimination with research that makes broader claims regarding
“the transgender population,” the essay invites researchers to develop a set of best practices that
resemble those of feminist science studies scholars.
Keywords methodology, transgender research, feminist science
T    his essay weighs the risks and benefits of quantifying a group of individuals
     who are made vulnerable by, actively challenge, and gain political recognition
from the categories rendered “real” by quantitative research. Acknowledging the
necessity of data like those produced by the National Transgender Discrimination
Survey (NTDS) (Grant et al. 2011), we consider the utility of research questions
that articulate aspects of the transgender experience to the nontransgender pop-
ulations with whom they share a wide range of bodily and lived experience.
          We define transgender as dynamic, unstable, and porous, and we use these
characteristics to explore the relative use of measuring transgender people. How,
in other words, can we quantify an experience that Judith Butler (2001: 627) has
called “becoming . . . itself”? As a start, we turn to a set of “good practice guide-
lines” (Springer, Stellman, and Jordan-Young 2012) developed to promote better
science about sex and gender.1 We believe that these guidelines, which insist on
carefully delineated claims that consider robust and explicit alternative mechanisms,
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly * Volume 2, Number 1 * February 2015                            13
DOI 10.1215/23289252-2848868 ª 2015 Duke University Press
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
14      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
offer a beginning standard by which trans researchers can gauge their quantitative
research instruments and results. We hope to generate a productive and inter-
disciplinary dialogue about the difficulties inherent in producing the “right” kinds
of research about transgender populations: how to produce useful and meaningful
data about an unstable category and how to capture the experience of being trans
for the widest variety of readers in ways that benefit transgender people.
        We depart from and extend Jamison Green’s (2006) assertion that trans
people are “just like anyone” (500) by suggesting that transgender is one of many
intersectional and socially hierarchical experiences. By reorienting research ques-
tions toward methodologies that do not assume nonconstructed differences
between transgender and nontransgender people, we redirect quantitative research
projects away from fixed understandings of trans toward those that are generative
and evolving in nature.
A Background Story
Measuring “the transgender population” presented a challenge for us when we
were invited to contribute a chapter to a handbook on sexuality demograph-
ics (Meier and Labuski 2013). Like many contributors to this journal, we were
energized by what trans lives make obvious: that sex and gender are profoundly
unstable realities whose “assumed concordance” (Karkazis 2008: 12) is more ideo-
logical than material. And though our goal was to represent trans people in the
most comprehensive and useful ways possible, we were acutely aware that such a
project was riddled with complexity. Like any unit of scientific analysis, trans-
gender is a category through which a wide variety of multidimensional individuals
are gathered, many of whom have little in common aside from their gender-
diverse bodies and practices.
        A related problem was that the term transgender is variably defined and
that, for many, this diverse nomenclature is a central feature of being trans
(Stryker, Currah, and Moore 2008).2 And though we were at pains to represent a
category that we saw as both multiple and evolving, we were stymied by how to
best render categorical resistance to an audience of demographers. Katherine
Rachlin (2009) argues that “researchers must be able to clearly define the sub-
group of interest for their study” (266), a challenge made difficult by two related
issues: first, a growing number of trans people explicitly resist categories that
stabilize gender in any way, rendering conventional quantitative methods unwieldy;
second, many transgender individuals know exactly “who they are” (Valentine
2007), regardless of whether categories exist to represent them.
        Quantifying the so-called trans population also risked allying with forms
of legitimacy and conformity through which many trans people have thus far
been marginalized (Vidal-Ortiz 2002; Califia 2012). Collected data can be used to
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
                          LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER     * The (Mis)Measure of Trans     15
downplay or background the concerns of trans people, and standardizing the
categories of pre- and postoperative could relegate many trans persons to a quasi-
legitimate status. Finally, we grappled with questions of methodology—that is,
“the more deeply embedded premises . . . [that] underpin how research questions
are asked [and] how studies are constructed” (Spanier and Horowitz 2011, 45). We
knew that our explanatory framework needed to capture a lived experience that
was simultaneously real and contingent, measurable yet elusive, and vulnerable to
misrepresentation while capable of representing itself.
         In the end, we agreed with researchers like Rachlin (2009), who describe
an “urgent need” for data that can “positively impact the lives of transgender
people” (261). We knew that demonstrating the prevalence of trans people,
however imperfectly, could contribute to both heightened awareness of and more
affirming attitudes toward trans people (Silverschanz 2009). The NTDS makes the
consequences of transphobia clear: in addition to higher rates of suicide attempts
and emotional distress, a full three-quarters of respondents experienced dis-
crimination, bullying, and violence in their lifetimes. In this context, any and all
evidence of the statistical prevalence of a population that some would prefer
remain invisible is a political and human rights necessity.
         But we also knew that if our “numbers” did not come with a context, that
is, did not translate into a more meaningful understanding of transgender lived
experience, then we would have gotten only part of it right. Moreover, if popu-
lation prevalence rates—of any percentage—led to even well-intentioned mis-
understandings that transgender was a stable and measurable “thing,” then we
were aligned with a reification project that reflected neither our own under-
standings of the term nor our politics about it. Ultimately, we wanted to hold
close the generative nature of trans while still communicating the ways in which
the experience could be “captured” for the benefit of trans people worldwide.3
Intra-researcher Complexity
Further complicating our efforts was the fact that we defined transgender dif-
ferently. For Colton Keo-Meier, transgender is a lived reality that becomes sta-
ble while it destabilizes man, woman, male, and female, while for Christine
Labuski, the instability of these categories exists on the same relative plane. In this
latter framework, transgender people and bodies offer as many insights about a
dynamic and evolving human condition as they do about alternative gender
systems; they help to reveal the instability of bodies—period. Evolution here is
not linear, with trans bodies positioned in between less perfect and more perfect
human forms. It is, rather, a way to think about the durable and inextricable
relationships between bodies and cultural practice; the physical and physio-
logical changes that signify trans—including prosthetics, pronouns, dress, and
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
16       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
surgery—are in a relationship with discourses and material realities involving
gender, genitals, bodies, power, and sex.
         In short, we were—and continue to be—of two minds concerning the
nature of trans. One of us, a transgenderqueer male psychologist, understands
transgender to be fairly stable across history and culture: trans people have existed
across time and space and, aside from cultural variation, reflect a similar mode of
gender incongruence that can—though need not—be addressed with medical
interventions or other modes of bodily adaptation. The other, a nontransgender
female cultural anthropologist, understands trans to be as local and contingent as
any other cultural practice or bodily state and that regardless of the existence of
gender nonconformers in other times and places, how people transition in the
contemporary United States reveals as much about the political economy, belief
systems, and physical environment of that time and place as it does about the
process of living gender differently.
         As individuals, we embrace these somewhat divergent perspectives. But as
researchers and coauthors, we recognize the conceptual difficulties they index.
Located in psychology and anthropology, we engage with almost mutually exclu-
sive literatures and frame problems in different ways. In this context, what is the
nature of the concept at hand? Can we produce work that “matters” to both of us
and to our disciplines? To be sure, conceptual instability is not a problem unique to
trans scholarship. But because the current question concerns measurement, we
are preoccupied by its translatability and utility. It is because transgender renders
other categories unstable that we must properly attend to its own contingencies.
         We suggest, then, that we think about trans people being “just like anyone”
by focusing on their intersections with other social hierarchies. These hierar-
chies—race, immigration status, physical ability—leave almost all of us both well
and poorly positioned in our various worlds; how this multidimensionality maps
onto the material experiences of trans and nontransgender people is part of what
interests us here. How, for instance, do transgender men of color experience black
male incarceration rates in the United States? How do trans women negotiate
street harassment from perpetrators who see them as female but not (necessarily)
trans? These articulations evidence an alternative methodology for trans research,
one that does not reduce the reality of transgender to a genetic sequence, a
neuroanatomical site, or childhood behavior patterns; one that allows us to
describe and construct “men and women who are also trans people” in addition
to a “transgender population.”
         Conventional quantitative methods cannot address these entangled forms
of difference; this is not news. But unpacking this assertion further helps to open
transgender research questions up to many other dimensions of identity. Dean
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
                          LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER    * The (Mis)Measure of Trans    17
Spade (2006) argues that the ways he was “different” as a child, including being
Christian and on welfare, were neither more nor less relevant to his transgender
identity than were his surgical or childhood behavioral histories: “Why should I
engage this idea that my gender performance has been my most important dif-
ference in my life? It hasn’t, and I can’t separate it from the class, race, and
parentage variables through which it was mediated” (319). By attending to these
imbrications, we hope to demonstrate how trans can fruitfully attach to other
forms of identity, not to dilute or mitigate the sometimes urgent realities of being
trans but to remind those of us who ask questions for a living that more precise
answers may come from analyses that do not render trans and nontrans as
mutually exclusive categories.
Counting the Problems
In this section, we more carefully examine some of the problems with quantitative
research that does not foreground transgender’s conceptual instability. We believe
that trans—like all other bodies and forms of identity —can and should be
researched as an identity coconstituted by its social milieu. We seek to incorporate
Susan Stryker’s (2006b) assertion that “encounter[s] [with] the transsexual body
[reveal] the constructedness of the natural order” (254) into a methodological
orientation useful to quantitative researchers, a set of strategies that the final
section of this essay will describe.
The NTDS
Developed and carried out by the National Center for Transgender Equality and
the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, the purpose of the NTDS was to “bring
the full extent of discrimination against transgender and gender non-conforming
[GNC] people to light” (Grant et al. 2011: 1). At 220 pages, the NTDS is the largest
set of quantitative data about transgender persons in the United States, and it tells
a difficult story: three-quarters of respondents report discrimination, bullying,
and violence at the hands of classmates, health care providers, police officers,
public officials, bosses and coworkers, teachers, and family members. These
experiences were associated with increased rates, when compared with national
averages, of drug and alcohol abuse, interrupted education, incarceration, mental
health problems, and suicidality. The survey also demonstrated significant racial
intersections, with transgender people of color experiencing much higher rates of
poverty and police harassment than their white counterparts. There is no ques-
tion that the NTDS represents a major achievement in quantitative research
design, that it has produced vital empirical data about being trans in the con-
temporary United States, and that these data will be analyzed by trans and legal
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                        TSQ
18       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
scholars, social scientists, and activists for decades. What we wish to explore further
is how the NTDS stabilized the term transgender in order to produce their data.
         Not surprisingly, the NTDS thought big and included “those who tran-
sition from one gender to another (transsexuals), and those who may not,
including genderqueer people . . . and those whose gender non-conformity is a
part of their identity” (2011: 12). Notably, the authors handled gender’s inherent
variability with a series of questions that addressed the act of nonconformity
rather than its specific content, including a self-assessment (“do you consider
yourself transgender?”); two questions contrasting birth-assigned and currently
lived gender; a list of terms with which respondents could identify; and two
questions about social interactions (“people can tell” and “I tell people”). The
data were then cleaned in order to eliminate respondents who did not meet
the researchers’ definition of transgender.
         Though the NTDS collected data regarding surgery, hormones, and other
transitional practices, these data were not used to define transgender. And though
this strategy reflects a set of admirable assumptions about research subjects’
capacities for self-representation, problems arise when other researchers make
different choices —for example, by explicitly tying inclusion criteria to respon-
dents’ having “made strides to accommodate” another gender (Vidal-Ortiz 2002:
225). Such “strides” are variously defined and may or may not include behaviors
in which cisgender people also engage (e.g., cross-dressing). Our concerns here
are not with the NTDS, whose tight focus reflected a methodological orientation
toward lived experience rather than ontology. But for researchers interested in
what constitutes transgender, survey instruments that do not more specifically
define the population in question may invite more confusion than clarity. As it
stands, trans scholars hoping to make empirically based claims have a variable—
and at times contradictory —set of definitions through which they must wade
(Lombardi 2009).
         David Valentine, for example, defines transgender as “a plastic cate-
gory . . . that clarifies a newly emergent model of gender and sexuality” (2012: 201),
while Stryker calls it “a wide variety of phenomena that call attention to the fact
that ‘gender’ as it is lived, embodied, experienced, performed, and encountered, is
more complex and varied than can be accounted for by the currently dominant
binary sex/gender ideology of Eurocentric modernity” (2006a: 3). For Sandy Stone,
the transsexual body is an intertextual one whose “troubling and productive
multiple permeabilities of boundary and subject position” must be negotiated
(1998: 300). These definitions make sense to most readers of this journal because
they highlight the complexities that confound quantitative analyses. But for those
attempting to count, measure, operationalize, define, or generate empirical data,
these definitions are more or less unusable.
                         Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
                           LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER     * The (Mis)Measure of Trans     19
Who and What Is Transgender? And Who Defines It?
Our concerns echo those of other researchers (Meezan and Martin 2009b) who
insist that we delineate “why we are studying this particular group at this par-
ticular point in time” (Wheeler 2009: 307), and who lament the fact that pro-
ducing and maintaining trans as a singular entity can complicate the use of
comparative data. In research she conducted with a group of trans men, for
example, Rachlin (2009) limited her claims by strictly defining her research
population: she combined a “a gender signifier” (birth-assigned female and male
identified) and “a behavior” (considering surgery) (267). She compares this pro-
cess with that of a colleague whose inclusion criteria for transitioning ranged from
surgery to pronoun use. Though both used definitions specific to their research
questions, their lack of concordance compromised their ability to generate widely
useful data.
        Indeed, inclusion criteria run the gamut, from expansive and some-
times vague advertisements for “anyone who does not identify strictly as their
‘male’ or ‘female’ birth sex” (Kuper, Nussbaum, and Mustanski 2012: 246) to
subcategorical—and narrowly imagined —lists of trans-related attributes. Other
studies simply report efforts to work with a “transgender community” (Rosser
et al. 2007) (or “key members” of it: Paxton, Guentzel, and Trombacco 2006),
whose interests are imagined to be homogeneous and represented as separate
from those of the researchers. Still others, illustrated most consistently by Valentine
(2007, 2012), question aspects of the category itself, arguing that its relevance
is largely structural and institutional.
        We argue that research design should begin with questions that specify
what is to be learned from a specific transgender population—for example, the
quantifiable experience of discrimination reported by the NTDS. What do ques-
tions about hormone use or surgery target, for example? Do they always inform
the issue at hand? Do they preclude other, potentially more relevant, dimensions
of bodily experience? If, for example, libido shifts during or after transition, how
to best understand the various roles played by genitals, hormones, erotic atten-
tion, and the social environment? What role do we think these factors play in
any person’s libido, and what are our assumptions regarding differences among
trans, GNC, and cis libidos? Do we imagine that exogenous hormones affect trans
and cis persons in the same ways? Are we willing to expand our findings to
nontransgender persons? And if not, why not? Again, we must be clear about what
we want to know from transgender respondents and who we think our data
represent—them, other people, or all of the above.
        If both trans and cisgender people experience shifts in erotic attraction
over the course of their lives, a finding from our own research with trans men
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
20       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
(Meier et al. 2013), how might we discern whether there are distinct mechanisms
at work? Kristen W. Springer, Jeanne Mager Stellman, and Rebecca Jordan-Young
(2012) argue that such mechanisms “must be articulated” in order to avoid “a
priori expectations of . . . difference” (1822). This is not to discount the possibility
of biologically measurable differences between these two groups, particularly
regarding hormones. But because hormones are not used by all trans people, and
because investigations of this experience are not (yet) standardized, we cannot
extrapolate hormone use to transgender as a scientific variable. And we most
certainly cannot do so if the hormone users in question differ along other
dimensions that might contribute to varied bodily experience, such as sex/gender,
race, or concomitant biological conditions.
         Though a full accounting of how race might intersect with the bodily
dimensions of transgender is beyond the scope of this essay, it is important to
note that it remains largely undertheorized, including in quantitative analyses. By
demonstrating that respondents of color fared worse along almost every measure
in their survey, the NTDS has given researchers the opportunity to elucidate the
details of these patterns and to develop theory about how transgender and race
interact as compounding—and measurable —biocultural stressors. Darrell P.
Wheeler (2009) argues that across the research in trans health, “there are dif-
ferences in outcomes based on or linked to race” (303) but that these outcomes are
rarely unpacked. Urging us to keep our focus intersectional, he notes the “serious
concerns” among some LGBT African Americans “about the appropriateness and
utility of research findings to the[ir] lives” (304). Our methodological orientation
is one way to address Wheeler’s concerns; research that includes transgender
alongside other dimensions of identity and experience—for example, “people of
color who are also trans” and “trans people who are also people of color” as
equally unstable but distinctly nuanced populations—has the potential to
address rather than evade these concerns.
Becoming (More) Precise
More precise definitional criteria, rather than supplanting direct questions about
transgender experience, can allow us to look at existing themes in novel ways. If,
for example, research on being trans at work demonstrates how profoundly
work is structured along gendered lines (Schilt 2006), why not reframe the issue
by aggregating rather than segregating trans and cis respondents, viewing “trans
at work” and “gender at work” as two separate but related dimensions of a wider
phenomenon? In this section, we look at two aspects of transgender that we
believe are especially amenable to such efforts: sexual orientation and gender.
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
                          LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER    * The (Mis)Measure of Trans     21
Sexual Orientation
Perry Silverschanz (2009) notes that “research has shown that lesbians and
transgender people are less likely to seek medical care [because of ] distressing
interactions with medical providers” (3) and recommends LGBT-specific training
modules as a remedy. The NTDS data support his argument by demonstrating
“widespread provider ignorance” about transgender patients and severe levels of
discrimination in the United States health care system, all compounded by race,
income, and education (Grant et al. 2011: 72–86). Though we too want to educate
providers, we begin our discussion with Silverschanz because of the imprecise
nature of his concerns. What, we ask, is the underlying factor at work in these
disparities, and how exactly does it connect lesbian and transgender individuals?
If the inadequate care of these groups is related to their “sexual minority” status,
why are gay men or bisexual people not struggling with this issue?
        Here, the concept of sexual minority serves as a “proxy” (Springer, Stellman,
and Jordan-Young 2012: 1818) for related factors that are more limited and/or
precise. Though NTDS respondents reported alarming rates of discrimination in
health care settings, the survey also found that trans men were more likely to
postpone care than were trans women due to both financial insecurity and “dis-
crimination and disrespect” (Grant et al. 2011: 76). Our proxy question here is about
the more complicated natures of both transgender and health disparities and
whether women—including (cis and trans) lesbians—articulate, as research var-
iables, with trans men who have “female” genitalia and reproductive organs. Might
these trans men’s past experiences of being perceived as female patients overlap
with the experiences of cisgender lesbians and (some) GNC or other cisgender
heterosexual women? Might (some of) their lived experiences as women play a
role in their increased economic precarity? And what role, if any, does sexual
orientation play in any of this? What is the precise definition of “sexual minority”
that adequately attends to these multidimensional strands of analysis?
        These questions inform our own questions regarding sexual orientation
and trans men, who, according to the NTDS, were more likely than trans women
to describe themselves as queer (46 percent and 7 percent, respectively [Grant
et al. 2011: 29]). Our research (Meier et al. 2013) demonstrates that shifts in
attraction patterns are common among this group (35 percent of our sample) and
that many eschew binary classificatory schemas (straight/gay) that do not cor-
relate with their day-to-day experience. These multi-directional shifts in so-called
sexual orientation, which have yet to be adequately described, theorized, or
predicted, cut across all subgroups of trans men, including those whose gender
identity or sexual orientation felt stable before transitioning. Though variables
such as the use of exogenous testosterone and being seen as male by partner(s)
have received some attention (Devor 1993, 1997; Schleifer 2006; Meier et al. 2013),
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
22      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
the respective roles played by surgery, nonsurgical transitioning aids, community
support (or the lack of it), mental health variables, relationships with other trans
people, or the ability to openly transition at work or school—all of which are
amenable to quantitative analysis—have barely begun to be outlined or described.
        Moreover, reports of trans men’s low levels of same-gender attraction
(APA 2000; Bockting, Benner, and Coleman 2009) are worth reexamining. Fifty-
one percent of our respondents reported current attractions to both men and
women, and 17 percent reported exclusive attractions to men. These percentages
may reflect a stable pattern of attraction; they may also be related to political and
social developments in a community increasingly comfortable describing same-
gender attractions. What is even more likely, however, and also suggested by our
data, is that these attractions are part of a more fluid spectrum of desire, some of
which is made available by the transitioning process itself. Additionally, and for a
variety of reasons, fewer than 10 percent of trans men have had gender affirmation
surgery involving their external genitalia (Meier et al. 2011), and many involve
their vaginas and vulvas in their sexual activity. Less costly hormone supplements
and body modifications (e.g., breast binders and prosthetic genitalia) make it
increasingly possible to live and be perceived as male, shaping a population that
is widely varied, both anatomically and experientially. In this milieu, “LGBT
researchers” must be willing to consider what it means for the category of “gay
man” to include people with vulvas, particularly if a vulva precludes entry into
that category for others.
        Finally, the shifting terms employed by researchers make interdisciplinary
interpretation difficult, leading non–trans specialists to wonder about things like
which trans men and women are gay, exactly? Does the definition stem from
anatomical “sex”—that is, genitalia and secondary sex characteristics —or from
gender identity and expression? What about sexual behavior? Do we presume
sexual orientation to be stable, or is it “fluid” in the ways described by Lisa
Diamond (2009), whose claims are especially interesting in that they involve
greater fluidity in “women”? Though her research was with cis women, what
questions does it help us to ask about trans women? To return to our good-
practice guidelines, what is the mechanism or social phenomenon that we would
want fluidity to inform?
Gender
Though the issue of how gender theory informs and is informed by transgender
studies is beyond the scope of this essay, we want to note two separate though
interrelated issues, the first being gender’s social asymmetry. The lived experiences
of women, though variously intersected, are generally subordinate to those of
men, meaning that acquiring a male identity involves accessing (more) power
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                              TSQ
                             LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER   * The (Mis)Measure of Trans     23
compared to transitioning to a female or nonbinary one. Gendered asymmetry
exists in virtually every social space that might be empirically measured; it is also
lived out by the body, in that women’s bodies are held to much stricter aesthetic
standards, leading to stark differences in the bodily alterations in which different
kinds of transgender people engage. “The fact is,” argues Valentine, “that the
history of medical research and attention, surgical sophistication, kinds of sur-
geries, access to surgeries, and cultural meanings of female-to-male and male-to-
female surgeries are not equivalent” (2012: 205).
        Research involving transgender people who identify as a particular gen-
der must attend to these differences and acknowledge gender as a hierarchically
ordered social dimension; analogizing the trans woman and trans man experience
risks erasing both their “interpenetration” and their “power-laden differences”
(Valentine 2012: 198).4 Closer methodological scrutiny can guide researchers as to
whether questions and results should be broken down by gender identity: Is the
research about the workplace, a site where gendered asymmetries exist for non-
transgender people? Is it about bodily aesthetics or the pressure to have cosmetic
surgery? Is it about sexual assault, military service, or other areas where maleness
and femaleness are experienced in sometimes acutely different ways? Again, we do
not suggest that these experiences do not also contain transgender dimensions.
But when an accurate understanding of gender is not built into the research
design, results are more likely to misrepresent the issue under investigation
(Schiebinger 2014).
        Second, transgender can be investigated, theorized, and lived as an
opting out of a priori gender identities, a phenomenon to which the NTDS was
extremely attentive. Whether this signifies different “kinds” of transgender people
remains to be seen, but reckoning the differences between trans women and trans
men should compel us to think in more precise ways about the source and
direction of sexual difference and dimorphism. Female, male, intersex, and all
other bodies—both cis and trans—overlap and diverge along numerous paths—
neurological, behavioral, hormonal, sociocultural, and genetic. The trans+gender
experience can therefore provoke questions about evolution, the hormonal envi-
ronment, bodily adaptation, epigenetics, biological stability, and what Jane Bennett
(2010: viii) calls “vitality.” Thinking in these terms invites research questions about
trans-specific bodily practices as well as how trans bodies exist alongside other
enhanced, augmented, or altered cyborg bodies—what Micha Cárdenas (2012)
refers to as “the transreal”—in addition to the social worlds in which they are
embedded.
        Foregrounding gender in our research design can also help us to think
more expansively about normative gender regimes. This argument has recently
been made by Valentine (2012), who insists that theoretical models of gender that
                               Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
24      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
fail to denaturalize the nontransgender, or “NT,” experience leave transgender
individuals “bear[ing] the full weight of binary gender” (189). Developing his
argument specifically around the process of sex reassignment surgery (SRS),
Valentine insists that binary gender norms are shored up less by transsexuals
seeking SRS than by gender theorists who do not actively question why NT people
leave their genitals alone. In other words, Valentine suggests that gender categories
are (re)produced by the decision to opt out of genital reassignment, a decision
that many transgender people also avoid. Research design that starts here can
open the category of transgender to anyone willing to alter their body in ways that
trouble normative gender regimes, a process that Spade calls “mutilating gender”
(2006: 315). This might include women who forego breast reconstruction after a
mastectomy or “take hormones and become sexy ‘bearded ladies’” or anyone who
does not “prioritize how their genitals will look to others” (323). What we want to
stress here is that both trans and nontrans people can engage in this mutilation
and that researchers must account for all of the ways in which they do.
        Regardless of whether trans constitutes its own gender, some suggest that
many trans people nonetheless “do gender” differently. Salvador Vidal-Ortiz
(2002) describes alternative forms of masculinity pursued by trans men, attrib-
uting this to a “burden of sexism” they disproportionately bear (191); he and
others also find trans men using dress to distinguish themselves from “dykes”
(Halberstam 1998) or engaging in stereotypical forms of sexuality that “shore up”
their masculinity. This behavior is unsurprising given the number of trans people
who “have no intention of undermining present gender inequalities” or binaries
(Schact 2002: 161), people who want “quite simply to be” male or female (Prosser
1998: 32) and do not wish to yield the “apparent naturalness of sex” to non-
transgender people.
        Whether we refer to this group as nondisclosing (colloquially, “stealth”),
passing, or under the radar, they pose interesting problems for quantitative
analyses, as they could be counted among both transgender and nontransgender
populations. In some ways, they may be “easier” to measure given their unam-
biguous identities as male or female, though it is the unmarked quality of their
gender identities that may keep them from even completing a survey like the
NTDS. Important questions remain regarding the relationship of these sub-
populations to an apparently growing number of queer and GNC transgender
people; to our minds, they represent a fruitful area for quantitative inquiry.
        A final point in this discussion is the role that feminist analysis can and
should play in our methodologies. Though feminism’s relationship to transgen-
der studies has at times been an ambivalent one (Stryker, Currah, and Moore
2008; Enke 2012), there is a long history of scholarship from both areas working
toward what Stephen Whittle (2006) refers to as “a better set of values in which
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
                            LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER  * The (Mis)Measure of Trans    25
gender loses some of its power of oppression” (202). Research designs that do not
attend to the ways in which power is unevenly distributed across all bodies risk
allowing transgender to “contain all [the] gender trouble” (Stryker 2004: 214) and,
potentially, all of its radicality. And, though the NTDS paid close attention to the
ways in which distinctly gendered participants experienced discrimination, the
reporting of its qualitative data did not consistently interrogate the normative
gender performed by some respondents.
        In describing their experience with school-based discrimination, for
example, one participant wrote that they were “harassed . . . bullied [and] forced
to wear dresses to school” (Grant et al. 2011: 46). What we find missing from this
account is a discussion—however brief—noting that gender-specific clothing is
also problematic for some cis girls. And though, again, we are attuned to the
“geometric” (Wheeler 2009: 302) forms of marginalization borne by trans chil-
dren, particularly those marked by other forms of social stigma, we nevertheless
want to ask whether part of our job as researchers and methodologists is to
construct instruments through which our respondents can reflect on the nor-
mative arrangements that our research actively questions. Whittle (2006) argues
that trans people have taught many feminists to “queer the pitch by highlighting,
clarifying, deconstructing and then blowing apart . . . all the things we know about
sex” (202); we seek only to extend this project to include cis girls and boys who
may also need support and advocacy in resisting the gender norms through which
their own nontransgender status will otherwise eventually be naturalized.
        This would also be true for research with trans men who report that having
sex as a man is often more pleasurable than it was as a woman (Vidal-Ortiz 2002;
Dozier 2005). In her research with vulvar pain patients, Labuski (2013) found that
the majority of her cis female respondents harbored longstanding feelings of
distress regarding the relative importance of their specific sexual needs, making
room for a broader discussion between trans and feminist scholars about how
female eroticism is subordinated along gendered lines. If we are to fully resist the
gender categories made real by the institutionalizing practices of medicine,
schools, the media, and the state, then our research instruments must make room
for our respondents to denaturalize gender in all its guises, including its struc-
tured hierarchies.
New Habits
William Meezan and James I. Martin argue that LGBTresearch “should be socially
responsible” (2009a: 424); Rachlin, in the same volume, adds that we should
“contribute not just to a greater understanding of transgender populations, but
also to their quality of life” (2009: 264–65). Though our prescriptive agenda leans
more toward research conduct and less toward social policy, we agree that our
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
26       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
research should better the lives of our participants: not only should we seek to
mitigate the potential harms to which so many trans people are routinely exposed,
we should strive to illuminate the ways in which transgender persons can advance
our understandings of human rights, bodily vulnerability, biocultural adapt-
ability, gender, racialization and other forms of intersectional identity, and dis-
crimination. More pragmatically, we also argue that transgender persons have
experiences that are unique to their form(s) of identity as well as common to other
populations, both of which can be measured using the methodological orienta-
tion developed here. In this section, we outline two ways this might be done.
         In an essay titled “Two Questions about Race,” anthropologist Alan
Goodman (2006) argues that race is “no longer the right way to describe [human]
biological variation.” Asserting that the term is part clumsy shorthand, part folk
tale, and part unstable scientific concept, Goodman cautions us about all the
things we ask race to do. Reminding us that 94 percent of human variation cannot
be statistically explained by race and that genetic variation is greater within so-
called racial groups than it is across them, Goodman concludes that race is an
unsuitable concept for scientific inquiry, a “blunt and dull instrument” that
should be replaced with more precise concepts and corresponding terminology.
         This assertion answers just one of Goodman’s questions, however: “Is race
a useful categorization to describe human biological variation?” We are more
interested in his second—“Is race a useful categorization for tracking sociopo-
litical injustices?”—in that it indexes our collective motives for “making trans-
gender count.” By answering in the affirmative, Goodman offers concise and
pragmatic advice regarding how to think about transgender’s complexity.
Transgender is biological in many of the ways that “race” is, in that none of its
bodily markers (e.g., altered genitalia, hormonal fluctuation) are unique to trans
individuals, nor are they demonstrable across all the types of people who identify
as trans. The point here is that de-essentializing transgender need not compro-
mise our efforts to document and measure its lived experience. And though
linguistic variation challenges our abilities to accurately represent these popula-
tions, we agree with Goodman that “new vocabulary and concepts” can help our
efforts achieve greater precision. As long as the term remains contingent, our
research, writing, and activism can continue to address transgender’s unstable
nature while simultaneously recognizing how it meaningfully organizes experience.
         Though a long tradition of opposing the material to the discursive has led
to some stagnant and fixed conceptions of the body, new materialist discourse
and theory (Bennett 2010; Barad 2007) remind us that the bodily dimensions
of being trans—anatomical variation, hormonal fluctuation, technological
augmentation—are precisely what make this population so dynamic, “fascinat-
ing” in their diversity (Goodman 2006), “far less implicated in physical norms,
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
                          LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER    * The (Mis)Measure of Trans    27
and far more diversely spread across rich and complex structuration of identity
and desire, than it is now possible to express” (Stone 1998: 301). Though it remains
critical to acknowledge, in the manner of the NTDS, the ways in which trans folks
are persistently and structurally marginalized, we must also begin asking ques-
tions from within this instability—diving into the dynamic bodies and lives of
transgender persons and opening them out to other categories of experience.
         Our second solution comes from feminist science studies, specifically
Springer, Stellman, and Jordan-Young’s “good practice guidelines” (2012: 1817)
that caution against unexamined uses of the terms sex and gender. Insisting that
biological differences between men and women virtually always bear the traces of
(social) gender, these authors call for more methodologically explicit delineations
of whether and how sex/gender functions as an independent variable. In the case
of cardiovascular disease, for example, numerous studies have described differ-
ences between males and females regarding risk and susceptibility. But what the
guidelines illustrate is that other mechanisms often dictate sex-specific risk (or
protection), including—in the studies they highlight—height and muscle mass.
“Women,” as they show, possess neither suboptimal glucose metabolism patterns
nor diminished arterial elasticity; it is shorter people and people with less muscle
mass who do. In these two cases, imprecision regarding the nature of the research
question leads not only to improperly reassured short men and unnecessarily
alarmed tall women but also to a general public underinformed about the rele-
vance and stability of measurable sex-based differences.
         Thus guided, we can consider how transgender might also function as a
proxy, a variable reducible to other categories or experiences. In our own research,
“trans man” might constitute a proxy for something far more specific and
amenable to measurement: “people assigned female at birth taking exogenous
testosterone at X dose” or “trans men who live in cities with large transgender
populations,” both of which address but do not homogenize the transgender
experience. Were our research focus to shift to, say, the relationship between
libido and genital alteration, we could use these guidelines to decide whether and
how to include genitally altered nontransgender people.
         The good-practice guidelines unsettle and displace the terms sex and
gender in scientific—specifically clinical—research; Springer and colleagues also
insist that alternative hypotheses, especially those involving social factors, be
analyzed, accommodated, and/or disproved. And though it is their specific
strategies that make the guidelines so appealing —they read like a literal “how
to”—it is their methodology that we want to highlight. Stressing the intersec-
tional nature of their orientation, they use the “new materialist” (Coole and Frost
2010) language of “irreducibl[e] entangle[ment]” (Springer, Stellman, and Jordan-
Young 2012: 1818) to describe the relationships between biology and culture. This
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
28      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
language helps us reassess research designs that attempt to measure the trans-
gender experience outside its social milieu. With what other social factors is the
aspect of transgender that we are investigating entangled? And what steps do we
need to take in order to ensure that we have properly taken those factors into
account?
Conclusions
Bonnie B. Spanier and Jessica D. Horowitz (2011) begin their methodological essay
by asking, “What are the biologically recognizable differences between gay people
and straight people[?]” (43), in order to illustrate a research question funda-
mentally grounded in two beliefs: first, that such differences exist; second, that
they are amenable to measurement. We conclude with this provocation in order
to review our major concerns and to gesture toward some of their implications.
        Submitting our research designs to a similar “scratch test”—that is, are
they based on unexamined assumptions about the differences between trans-
gender and nontransgender people or on the similarities between all transgender
people—is an important first step in delineating the kinds and scope of claims
we hope to make. Once our assumptions are explicit, claim-specific instruments
can be designed, and limitations can be anticipated. To continue with our own
example, if our interest is in the relationship between transitioning and changes in
libido and erotic attraction, we must define both “transitioning” and “libido” in
ways that are measurable, and these definitions must reflect the degree to which
we believe such a shift is unique to transgender people. Moreover, we should
be clear about whether we want our research to contribute to a wider body of
knowledge; if so, our definitions should strive to establish criteria that can be
replicated by other researchers. Reorienting our designs in this way can help us
avoid research trajectories that overly essentialize transgender people; it can also
make it possible to establish bodily and experiential links with nontransgender
people, “bursting transgender wide open” (Stryker, Currah, and Moore 2008: 12)
to any number of measurable dimensions.
        Research programs that neglect to elaborate the specific phenomena that
the transgender experience is meant to illuminate risk substituting the category
“trans” for any number of sociocultural processes—medical vulnerability (Grant
et al. 2011), bodily integrity (Loeb 2008), racialized gender (Roen 2001), or
misogyny (Serano 2012) —that exist within the broader population. These dis-
placements obscure our perspective on the aspects of trans experience that are
peculiar to these individuals and groups, and at the same time they circumscribe
our research questions to the aspects of trans identity that we, perhaps erro-
neously, believe to be incommensurate with nontrans experience. “Similarity,”
argue Springer, Stellman, and Jordan-Young, “should . . . be considered with the
                     Published by Duke University Press

                                                    TSQ
                             LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER         * The (Mis)Measure of Trans            29
same level of sophistication and attention given to explaining differences” (2012:
1822). Established similarities —however partial —can also be the basis for
political solidarity (Feinberg 1992).
        The degree to which we understand transgender in neurobiological, cul-
tural, anatomical, behavioral, and/or psychological terms will determine the
investigative angles and trajectories along which we trace and then establish a
series of associations, hypotheses, findings, and even predictions, many of which
will eventually articulate with public policy and popular media. We raise these
concerns not to dissuade any of us from trans-related research topics but to
highlight the significant limitations and potentially narrowed scope of the claims
we might make with conventionally framed research questions. In short, how we,
in Valentine’s (2007) words, “imagine” the experience and reality of transgender
will substantially shape the kinds of political and theoretical questions that we ask,
both of and about these anything-but-uniform populations.
        In heeding Valentine’s call to “reach for a different imagination” regarding
transgender experience (2012: 206), we are intrigued by the bodily states of hor-
monal instability, physiological precarity, and radical corporeal imaginaries that
are perhaps less quantifiable—and less politically urgent—than some of what we
have examined here. Nevertheless, we remain challenged to investigate and rep-
resent the lived experience of neither/nor (as well as both/and) that transgender
individuals often embrace and embody—the “rich and rapidly proliferating ecol-
ogies of embodied difference” described by Stryker, Paisley Currah, and Lisa Jean
Moore (2008: 12). These and other experiences articulate with a range of other
individuals and social groups, many of whom do not (yet) perceive a shared interest
with “the transgender population” but with whom precisely defined research pro-
jects can introduce and establish novel and even empathic forms of alliance.
Christine Labuski is an assistant professor of women’s and gender studies at Virginia Tech,
where she also directs the Gender, Bodies, and Technology initiative. Her ethnography, “It
Hurts Down There”: The Bodily Imaginaries of Female Genital Pain, is forthcoming.
Colton Keo-Meier is a clinical psychologist, researcher, and educator. He is a research coor-
dinator at the Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center and an affiliate of Baylor
College of Medicine. He teaches courses on human sexuality and transgender affirmative
counseling at the University of Houston and at Southern Methodist University.
Notes
1.      We are aware of the literatures in critical and feminist science studies in which the project
        and practices of empirical/imperialist, capital S “Science” are shown to depend on and
        reproduce the very categories they claim to investigate (e.g., Harding 1986). Within this
                               Published by Duke University Press

                                              TSQ
30        TSQ   * Transgender Studies Quarterly
          context, looking to scientific data for legitimacy is a potentially misguided endeavor, as
          “Science” produces what it already imagines. Though we take them quite seriously, this
          essay brackets these critiques for the reasons made clear by the NTDS. The urgency that
          we and many others experience about their data, coupled with a growing number of
          scientists practicing from a queer and/or feminist perspective, makes us optimistic that
          “strongly inferential, empirical tests” (Gowaty 2003: 903) can be designed with trans-
          gender people in mind.
2.        See Jaime M. Grant et al., esp. 183–84, for a helpful discussion about terminology and the
          category “gender-not-listed-here.”
3.        It is also important to note that qualitative research designs, such as the ethnographic
          methods in which Labuski is trained and that she typically employs, are particularly well
          suited toward accomplishing these aims. The present discussion is limited to specific
          insights about quantitative methods that our coauthorship has helped us to develop, but
          this does not mean that we do not recognize the crucial role that qualitative methods play
          in representing the complexity of social life.
4.        Valentine is citing Joseph 2002 here.
References
APA (American Psychiatric Association). 2000. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
          Disorders. 4th ed., text revision. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Barad, Karen. 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
          Matter and Meaning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Bennett, Jane. 2010. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University
          Press.
Bockting, Walter, Autumn Benner, and Eli Coleman. 2009. “Gay and Bisexual Identity Devel-
          opment among Female-to-Male Transsexuals in North America: Emergence of a
          Transgender Sexuality.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 38, no. 5: 688–701.
Butler, Judith. 2001. “Doing Justice to Someone: Sex Reassignment and Allegories of Transexu-
          ality.” GLQ 7, no. 4: 621–36.
Califia, Patrick. 2012. Sex Changes: Transgender Politics. Berkeley, CA: Cleis.
Cárdenas, Micha. 2012. The Transreal: Political Aesthetics of Crossing Realities. New York: Atropos.
Coole, Diana, and Samantha Frost. 2010. New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics.
          Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Devor, Holly. 1993. “Sexual Orientation Identities, Attractions, and Practices of Female-to-Male
          Transsexuals.” Journal of Sex Research 30, no. 4: 303–15.
Devor, Holly. 1997. FTM: Female-to-Male Transsexuals in Society. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
          versity Press.
Diamond, Lisa. 2009. Sexual Fluidity: Understanding Women’s Love and Desire. Cambridge, MA:
          Harvard University Press.
Dozier, Raine. 2005. “Beards, Breasts, and Bodies: Doing Gender in a Sexed World.” Gender and
          Society 19, no. 3: 297–316.
Enke, Anne Finn. 2012. “Introduction: Transfeminist Perspectives.” In Transfeminist Perspectives
          in and beyond Transgender and Gender Studies, edited by Anne Finn Enke, 1–15. Phila-
          delphia: Temple University Press.
Feinberg, Leslie. 1992. Transgender Liberation: A Movement Whose Time Has Come. New York:
          World View Forum.
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                                      TSQ
                                LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER         * The (Mis)Measure of Trans        31
Goodman, Alan. 2006. “Two Questions about Race.” Social Science Research Council, Is Race
         Real? (blog), June 7. raceandgenomics.ssrc.org/Goodman.
Gowaty, Patricia. 2003. “Sexual Natures: How Feminism Changed Evolutionary Biology.” Signs 28,
         no. 3: 901–21.
Grant, Jaime M., et al. 2011. “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender
         Discrimination Survey.” Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality and
         National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Green, Jamison. 2006. “Look! No, Don’t! The Visibility Dilemma for Transsexual Men.” In
         The Transgender Studies Reader, edited by Susan Stryker and Stephen Wittle, 499–508.
         New York: Routledge.
Halberstam, Judith. 1998. “Transgender Butch: Butch/FTM Border Wars and the Masculine
         Continuum.” GLQ 4, no. 2: 287–310.
Harding, Sandra. 1986. “From the Woman Question in Science to the Science Question in
         Feminism.” In The Science Question in Feminism, 14–29. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
         Press.
Joseph, Miranda. 2002. “Family Affairs: The Discourse of Global/Localization.” In Queer Globa-
         lizations: Citizenship and the Afterlife of Colonialism, edited by Arnaldo Cruz-Malave and
         Martin Manalansan, 71–99. New York: New York University Press.
Karkazis, Katrina. 2008. Fixing Sex: Intersex, Medical Authority, and Lived Experience. Durham,
         NC: Duke University Press.
Kuper, Laura E., Robin Nussbaum, and Brian Mustanski. 2012. “Exploring the Diversity of Gender
         and Sexual Orientation in an Online Sample of Transgender Individuals.” Journal of Sex
         Research 49, nos. 2–3: 244–54.
Labuski, Christine. 2013. “Vulnerable Vulvas: Female Genital Integrity in Health and Dis-ease.”
         Feminist Studies 39, no. 1: 248–76.
Loeb, Elizabeth. 2008. “Cutting It Off: Bodily Integrity, Identity Disorders, and the Sovereign
         Stakes of Corporeal Desire in U.S. Law.” WSQ 36, nos. 3–4: 44–63.
Lombardi, Emilia. 2009. “Varieties of Transgender/Transsexual Lives and Their Relationship with
         Transphobia.” Journal of Homosexuality 56, no. 8: 977–92.
Meezan, William, and James I. Martin. 2009a. “Doing Research on LGBT Populations: Moving the
         Field Forward.” In Meezan and Martin 2009b, 415–27.
———, eds. 2009b. Handbook of Research with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Popula-
         tions. New York: Routledge.
Meier, S., and Christine Labuski. 2013. “The Demographics of the Transsexual Population.” In
         International Handbook on the Demography of Sexuality, edited by Amanda Baumle, 289–
         327. New York: Springer.
Meier, S., et al. 2011. “The Effects of Hormonal Gender Affirmation Treatment on Mental Health
         in Female-to-Male Transsexuals.” Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health 15, no. 3:
         281–99.
——— 2013. “Measures of Clinical Health among Female-to-Male Transgender Persons as a
         Function of Sexual Orientation.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 42, no. 3: 463–74.
Paxton, Keisha Carr, Heather Guentzel, and Kellii Trombacco. 2006. “Lessons Learned in
         Developing a Research Partnership with the Transgender Community.” American Journal
         of Community Psychology 37, nos. 3–4: 349–56.
Prosser, Jay. 1998. Second Skins: The Body Narratives of Transsexulity. New York: Columbia
         University Press.
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
32       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Rachlin, Katherine. 2009. “The Questions We Ask: Conducting Socially Conscious Research with
         Transgender Individuals.” In Meezan and Martin 2009b, 261–79.
Roen, Katrina. 2001. “Transgender Theory and Embodiment: The Risk of Racial Marginalisation.”
         Journal of Gender Studies 10, no. 3: 253–63.
Rosser, B. R. Simon, et al. 2007. “Capturing the Social Demographics of Hidden Sexual Mino-
         rities: An Internet Study of the Transgender Population in the United States.” Sexuality
         Research and Social Policy 4, no. 2: 50–61.
Schacht, Steven P. 2002. “Four Renditions of Doing Female Drag: Feminine Appearing Con-
         ceptual Variations of a Masculine Theme.” In Gendered Sexualities, vol. 6 of Advances
         in Gender Research, edited by Patricia Gagne and Richard Tewksbury, 157–80. Oxford:
         Elsevier Science.
Schiebinger, Londa. 2014. “Analyzing Gender.” genderedinnovations.stanford.edu/methods
         /gender.html (accessed December 1, 2014).
Schilt, Kristin. 2006. “Just One of the Guys? How Transmen Make Gender Visible at Work.”
         Gender and Society 20, no. 4: 465–90.
Schleifer, David. 2006. “Make Me Feel Mighty Real: Gay Female-to-Male Transgenderists
         Negotiating Sex, Gender, and Sexuality.” Sexualities 9: 57–75.
Serano, Julia. 2012. “Reclaiming Femininity.” In Transfeminist Perspectives in and beyond Trans-
         gender and Gender Studies, edited by Anne Enke, 170–83. Philadelphia: Temple University
         Press.
Silverschanz, Perry. 2009. “What’s ‘Queer’ Got to Do with It? Enlightening Mainstream Research.”
         In Meezan and Martin 2009b, 3–16.
Spade, Dean. 2006. “Mutilating Gender.” In The Transgender Studies Reader, edited by Susan
         Stryker and Stephen Wittle, 315–32. New York: Routledge.
Spanier, Bonnie B., and Jessica D. Horowitz. 2011. “Looking for Difference? Methodology Is in the
         Eye of the Beholder.” In Gender and the Science of Difference: Cultural Politics of Con-
         temporary Science and Medicine, edited by Jill A. Fisher, 43–66. New Brunswick, NJ:
         Rutgers University Press.
Springer, Kristen W., Jeanne Mager Stellman, and Rebecca Jordan-Young. 2012. “Beyond a Catalogue
         of Differences: A Theoretical Frame and Good Practice Guidelines for Researching Sex/
         Gender in Human Health.” Social Science and Medicine 74, no. 11: 1817–24.
Stone, Sandy. 1998. “The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto.” In The Visible
         Woman: Imaging Technologies, Gender, and Science, edited by Paula A. Treichler, Lisa
         Cartwright, and Constance Penley, 285–309. New York: NYU Press.
Stryker, Susan. 2004. “Transgender Studies: Queer Theory’s Evil Twin.” GLQ 10, no. 2: 212–15.
———. 2006a. “(De)Subjugated Knowledges: An Introduction to Transgender Studies.” In The
         Transgender Studies Reader, edited by Susan Stryker and Stephen Wittle, 1–17. New York:
         Routledge.
———. 2006b. “My Words to Victor Frankenstein above the Village of Chamounix.” In The
         Transgender Studies Reader, edited by Susan Stryker and Stephen Wittle, 244–56. New
         York: Routledge.
Stryker, Susan, Paisley Currah, and Lisa Jean Moore. 2008. “Introduction: Trans-, Trans, or
         Transgender?” WSQ 36, nos. 3–4: 11–22.
Valentine, David. 2007. Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category. Durham, NC:
         Duke University Press.
———. 2012. “Sue E. Generous: Toward a Theory of Non-Transexuality.” Feminist Studies 38,
         no. 1: 185–211.
                         Published by Duke University Press

                                                TSQ
                              LABUSKI and KEO-MEIER     * The (Mis)Measure of Trans          33
Vidal-Ortiz, Salvador. 2002. “Queering Sexuality and Doing Gender: Transgender Men’s Iden-
         tification with Gender and Sexuality.” In Gendered Sexualities, vol. 6 of Advances in
         Gender Research, edited by Patricia Gagne and Richard Tewksbury, 181–233. Oxford:
         Elsevier Science.
Wheeler, Darrell P. 2009. “Methodological Issues in Conducting Community-Based Health and
         Social Services Research among Urban Black and African American LGBT Populations.”
         In Meezan and Martin 2009b, 300–314.
Whittle, Stephen. 2006. “Where Did We Go Wrong: Feminism and Trans Theory—Two Teams on
         the Same Side?” In The Transgender Studies Reader, edited by Susan Stryker and Stephen
         Wittle, 194–202. New York: Routledge.
                                Published by Duke University Press

