NOTICE:       The copyright law of the United States
(Title 17, U.S. Code) governs the making of photocopies or other
reproductions of copyrighted material. Under certain conditions
specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a
photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specified conditions
is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be "used for any
purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research."
The CDC library absorbs the cost of copyright fees charged by
publishers when applicable and the cost of articles and books
obtained from other libraries. Copyright fees average $35.00 and
fees charged by the lending libraries are between $10 and $15 per
request

                                                TSQ
“Counting” Transgender
 and Gender-Nonconforming
 Adults in Health Research
 Recommendations from the
 Gender Identity in US Surveillance Group
            SA R I L . R E I S N E R , K E R I T H J . C O N R O N , S C O U T, K E L L A N BA K E R ,
                    J O DY L . H E R M A N , E M I L I A L O M B A R D I , E M I LY A . G R E Y TA K ,
        A L IS O N M . G I L L , a n d A L I C I A K . M AT T H E W S , T h e G e n I U S S G r o u p
 Abstract Gender minority refers to transgender and gender-nonconforming people whose sex assigned
 at birth is different from their current gender identity. US health surveillance systems do not routinely
 include questions to identify gender minority respondents, resulting in a lack of representative health
 data that can be used to evaluate the health of gender minorities. This omission represents a missed
 opportunity to understand the health and well-being of transgender and gender-nonconforming people
 as well as to learn more about sex and gender differences that may be relevant for the health of all
 people—gender minority and majority alike. In 2011, the Williams Institute at the University of
 California, Los Angeles, School of Law convened the Gender Identity in US Surveillance (GenIUSS)
 Group, bringing together a multidisciplinary and multi-institutional group of experts to increase
 population-based data about gender minority people through the inclusion of gender-related measures
 (e.g., assigned sex at birth, gender identity, transgender status) in surveys, with a particular con-
 sideration for publicly funded data-collection efforts. Drawing on the expertise and experience of the
 GenIUSS Group, this article provides an overview of challenges and opportunities and makes eight
 recommendations for “counting” gender minority adults in health research, with an emphasis on
 adult population-based surveys.
 Keywords transgender, gender minority, disparities, health surveillance, measurement
 G     ender minority is an inclusive umbrella term that refers to transgender and
       gender-nonconforming people—people whose sex assigned at birth (natal
 sex) is different from their current gender identity (IOM 2011). US health sur-
 veillance systems monitoring adult health do not routinely include questions to
 TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly * Volume 2, Number 1 * February 2015                               34
 DOI 10.1215/23289252-2848877 ª 2015 Duke University Press
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group  * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research    35
identify gender minority respondents, resulting in a lack of representative health
data that can be used to evaluate the health of gender minorities (IOM 2011). This
omission represents a missed opportunity to better understand the health and
well-being of transgender and gender-nonconforming people who dispropor-
tionately face social stressors such as transgender stigma, discrimination, and
violence that negatively impact their health and well-being (Bockting et al. 2013;
Bradford et al. 2013; Clements-Nolle et al. 2001; Clements-Nolle, Marx, and Katz
2006; Grant et al. 2011; Herbst et al. 2008; Kenagy 2005; Lombardi et al. 2001;
Nuttbrock et al. 2010; Reisner et al. 2014a, 2014b, 2014c) as well as to learn more
about how sex and gender may be relevant for the health of all people (Krieger
2003), gender minority and gender nonminority alike.
        In 2011, a landmark report by the Institute of Medicine identified the lack
of brief, validated tools with which to identify gender minority respondents
in health research as a current barrier to monitoring the health of the gender
minority population (IOM 2011). In 2011, the Williams Institute at the University
of California, Los Angeles, School of Law convened the Gender Identity in US
Surveillance (GenIUSS) Group, bringing together a national multidisciplinary
and multi-institutional group of experts to increase population-based data
about gender minority people through the inclusion of gender-related measures
(e.g., natal sex, gender identity, transgender status) in surveys, with a particu-
lar consideration for publicly funded data-collection efforts. To achieve this
goal, the group mapped the landscape of current practices in gender-related
population research, assessed methodological and other challenges to data
collection, and generated a set of recommendations for gathering scientifically
rigorous data about the needs and experiences of transgender and gender-
nonconforming individuals (GenIUSS Group 2013). GenUISS also funded two
mixed-methods cognitive-testing studies of gender-related measures for use in
population-based research (Lombardi et al., in preparation; Reisner 2013; Reisner
et al. 2014d).
        Drawing on the expertise and experience of the GenIUSS Group, this
article provides an overview of opportunities, challenges, and recommendations
for “counting” transgender and gender-nonconforming adults in US population
health research. First, we situate transgender and gender-nonconforming adult
health research within a framework of sex and gender health disparities. Second,
we review considerations for measurement of gender identity in adult population-
based surveys and offer recommendations of measures that identify gender minority
respondents and will enable inclusive health surveillance efforts. This article
contains eight recommendations proposed by the GenIUSS Group to guide
inclusive sex and gender adult population-based research (see appendix). A full
report and list of recommendations can be found elsewhere (GenIUSS Group
2014). Additional measures and recommendations pertaining to adolescents
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
36      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
and youth specifically can also be found elsewhere (Conron et al. 2014; GenIUSS
Group 2014).
Sex and Gender as Social Determinants of Health
Sex and gender are recognized globally as social determinants of health and well-
being across a wide variety of geographic settings and contexts (Doyal 2001, 2003;
Krieger 2003; Nieuwenhoven and Klinge 2010; Nowatzki and Grant 2011; Vlassoff
2007; WHO 2008). Social determinants of health are root causes of health dis-
parities (WHO 2008). Health disparity refers to “a particular type of difference
in health . . . in which disadvantaged social groups—such as poor, racial/ethnic
minorities, women, or other groups who have persistently experienced social
disadvantage or discrimination—systematically experience worse health or greater
health risks than more advantaged social groups” (Braveman 2006). Reducing
health disparities is a core aim of Healthy People 2020 (US Department of Health
and Human Services 2010), the science-based roadmap with ten-year national
measurable objectives and goals for improving the health of all Americans. Bet-
tering the health of all people includes addressing health inequities in the United
States—defined as unfair and avoidable differences in health —related to sex and
gender (Gorman and Read 2006; Read and Gorman 2006). Gender minority
people are positioned at the intersection of complex sex and gender pathways; that
is, causal mechanisms that cause poor health are both sex and gender related
(Reisner et al. 2014e). Thus learning more about the social determinants of gender
minority people’s health and well-being is an important task to inform health
equity for everyone.
        US population-level surveys do not utilize standardized questions to
collect information about sex and gender (Conron et al. 2014). Most surveys
measure sex with a self-reported demographic question (male or female). Some
surveys rely on telephone interviewers to assess perceived sex or gender based on
the vocal tone of respondents (Conron et al. 2012, 2014). The lack of standardized
measures of both sex and gender impacts the empirical rigor of research on sex
and gender differences in US population health by obfuscating differences
between natal sex (biological) and gender (social) pathways. Underlying non-
standardization of measures is a lack of conceptual clarity about sex and gender
that fails to recognize that (1) sex and gender represent distinct constructs; (2) sex
and gender are multidimensional and dynamic; and (3) gender identity is not
synonymous with sexual orientation.
Recommendation 1: That standardized self-report questions about both sex and gender
be included in all surveys of the US population.
Despite the imprecise and often interchangeable use of sex (“female” and “male”)
and gender (“woman” and “man”) in the scientific research literature (Krieger
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group   * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research    37
2003), sex and gender are not one and the same. Sex refers to biological differences
among females and males, such as genetics, hormones, secondary sex charac-
teristics, and anatomy (Haig 2004). The assignment of sex at birth (female or
male) is made by medical providers and is typically based on the appearance of
external genitalia. Sex is then labeled and categorized as female or male and is
usually documented on a birth certificate to become a legal construct. Gender
typically refers to cultural meanings ascribed to or associated with patterns of
behavior, experience, and personality that are labeled as feminine or masculine
(IOM 2011). The lack of recognition that sex and gender are distinct constructs
can be seen in US population survey practice. Some surveys rely on interviewer
judgment to assess the sex of respondents (Conron et al. 2012; Conron et al.
2014). For example, neither sex nor gender are self-reported on the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS); rather, these constructs are noted by the
telephone interviewer (as sex based on interviewer-perceived tone of respon-
dent voice) and confirmed with the respondent if needed (Conron et al. 2012).
This would be a source of significant measurement error for gender minor-
ity respondents. Thus, the consequences of these measurement techniques are
inappropriate data collection on gender minority populations. They also can
lead to error in other situations, such as with people who smoke, or who have
unusually high or low speaking voices. Measuring sex and gender in US popu-
lation surveys will contribute to understanding and ameliorating sex and gender
health inequities.
Recommendation 2: That multiple aspects of gender be measured in US population-based
research, including gender identity.
Gender is a multidimensional construct (Egan and Perry 2001) that requires
additional empirical and theoretical attention. Understanding gender means
attending to the psychological, social, and behavioral dimensions that influence
individual health and well-being and contribute to population-level health dis-
parities. A key dimension of gender that represents an underinvestigated social
determinant of population health is gender identity (IOM 2011). Gender identity
refers to a person’s internal sense of being man, woman, transgender, or another
gender. US population-level surveys do not routinely include survey items to
identify transgender and/or gender-nonconforming respondents; therefore, there
is a lack of routine health surveillance data to monitor health disparities by
gender identity (Conron et al. 2014; IOM 2011). Representative data that allow
comparisons between gender minority and majority people are essential to
document health inequities as well as to reduce sex and gender health disparities
in the United States (Schwartz and Meyer 2010).
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                         TSQ
38       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
         Despite the dearth of probability-based national-level data on the health of
gender minority people (Conron et al. 2012), local, regional, and national studies
suggest that transgender and gender-nonconforming people face stigma, preju-
dice, violence, and institutionalized discrimination in areas of everyday life such
as health care, housing, employment, education, and legal recognition of their
gender. As a result of these social stressors and socioeconomic marginalization,
gender minority people appear highly burdened by adverse health outcomes
including psychological distress, suicidality, substance use and abuse, tobacco
use, HIV, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) (Bockting et al. 2013; Brad-
ford et al. 2013; Clements-Nolle et al. 2001; Clements-Nolle, Marx, and Katz 2006;
Conron et al. 2012; Grant et al. 2011; Hendricks and Testa 2012; Herbst et al.
2008; Kenagy 2005; Nuttbrock et al. 2010; Reisner, Bailey, and Sevelius 2014;
Reisner et al. 2014b, 2014c). Negative health outcomes appear to be exacerbated
for transgender- and gender-nonconforming-identified people who experience
intersecting oppressions as members of other disadvantaged social groups (Bowleg
2012), for example, people of color and/or those who are economically marginalized
and living in poverty (Garofalo et al. 2006; Herbst et al. 2008). In addition to
adverse health outcomes among people who identify as transgender and gender
nonconforming, the negative health sequelae of having a nonconforming gender
expression have also been documented (D’Augelli, Grossman, and Starks 2006;
Rosario, Schrimshaw, and Hunter 2008; Sandfort, Melendez, and Diaz 2007;
Skidmore, Linsenmeier, and Bailey 2006; Toomey et al. 2010), including recalled
childhood nonconforming gender expression measured retrospectively (Calzo
et al. 2014; Roberts et al. 2012, 2013; Rosario et al. 2014). Together these data suggest
the need for routine health surveillance that takes gender identity into account.
         Gender pathways are multilevel and sociohistorically and culturally depen-
dent, and they dynamically change over time. Understanding gender means not only
conceptualizing and measuring different dimensions of gender but also considering
its dynamic nature. Gender is relational and fundamental to the social structuring of
power and privilege (Courtenay 2000). Dimensions of gender affect people’s health
and well-being at multiple levels of influence (Ferrant 2014). Thus, gendered path-
ways can be best conceptualized using a social-ecological model (McLeroy et al.
1988) whereby individual, interpersonal, organizational, community, and public
policy levels influence population health (see fig. 1).
         Gender is also sociohistorically and culturally dependent, meaning gender
diversity manifests differently in various contexts and settings and over time.
Dimensions of gender are dynamic and may change across a person’s individual
development; for example, a person’s gender expression may change from young
adulthood to middle age. These changes have implications for health across the
life course (Pearlin et al. 2005). Dimensions of gender may also change over time
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                                   TSQ
         The GenIUSS Group    * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research 39
Figure 1. Understanding gender as a social determinant of health
and throughout sociopolitical history —for example, intergenerational and age
cohort shifts in gender-nonconforming expression or even what is acceptable as
gender-nonconforming behavior (e.g., women wearing pants). These changes
affect how gender diversity is conceptualized in population research. For example,
over the past fifteen years there has been a paradigm shift in gender minor-
ity health research from a disease-based model (transgender and gender non-
conforming as disorder) to an identity-based model (transgender and gender
nonconforming as identity) (Bockting 2008, 2009). Conceptualizing transgen-
der and gender-nonconforming people as having diverse, nonpathological gen-
der identities and gender expressions rather than as “disordered” reformulates
how a “case” is defined and measured in population research. Such redefinition of
a case also affects prevalence estimates as to the number of gender minority people
in the United States.
Recommendation 3: That questions specific to gender minorities be asked using
skip patterns.
Gender minorities represent an underserved and underresearched population
with specific medical and mental health needs (Grant et al. 2011; Grossman and
D’Augelli 2006; Mayer et al. 2008), many of which remain unexplored. Collecting
                               Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
40      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
more high-quality data on the disparities associated with a transgender or gender-
nonconforming identity and other social, economic, and health concerns of gender
minority communities is essential if federal, state, local, and nonprofit agencies are
to adequately serve transgender and gender-nonconforming people. Improved data
are also necessary to allow researchers to better understand the backgrounds and
needs of gender minority people and to help transgender advocates and their allies
develop effective strategies for improving the circumstances of transgender and
gender-nonconforming people’s lives, including addressing inequities.
        Many aspects of the needs and experiences of gender minority people
remain unexplored (IOM 2011). Adding gender identity to surveys allows for skip
patterns (a question or series of questions associated with a conditional response
that can be skipped); thus questions specific to gender minorities can be asked. An
example of questions that can be asked of gender minority respondents in skip
patterns are those relating to gender affirmation (Sevelius 2013). Gender affirmation
can be conceptualized across three domains: social (name, pronoun, disclosure of
gender to others, passing), medical (hormones, surgery, etc.), and legal (name
change, gender marker change, document amendments). All three domains may be
relevant for the health of gender minority people and should be queried. Another
example of questions for skip patterns are those relating to antitransgender dis-
crimination (Bradford et al. 2013), resilience processes (Bockting et al. 2013), and
coping (Budge, Adelson, and Howard 2013) in response to chronic adversity.
Adding a gender minority–specific module of questions that a relatively small
subset of respondents will be asked is a cost-effective endeavor. Although some
cost will be incurred, this additional cost will be offset by the benefit of rendering
visible the lives, experiences, and health of gender minority people.
Recommendation 4: A measure of gender identity does not replace sexual
orientation (identity, attraction, behaviors). Measuring both gender identity
and sexual orientation is recommended for US population-based surveys.
Gender identity is often mistakenly conflated with sexual orientation. As an
example, the National Center for Health Statistics sexual identity question, which
was added to the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) in 2014 (CDC 2014), is
an inadequate and inaccurate measure of gender identity. “Transgender” is one
response option in a subset of “Something else” on the sexual orientation identity
measure. The NHIS sexual orientation identity measure queries respondents as
follows: “Which of the following best represents how you think of yourself?” with
response options “Gay,” “Straight, that is, not gay,” “Bisexual,” “Something else,”
“Refused,” “I don’t know the answer.” If respondents answer “Something else,” a
subsequent question is asked that includes a response option for gender minority
people: “What do you mean by something else?” with response options: “You are
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group  * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research       41
not straight, but identify with another label such as queer, trisexual, omnisexual
or pansexual,” “You are transgender, transsexual or gender variant,” “You have
not figured out or are in the process of figuring out your sexuality,” “You do not
think of yourself as having a sexuality,” “You do not use labels to identify your-
self,” “You mean something else,” “Refused,” “Don’t know.”
         There are several factors related to this measure that make it a decidedly
poor measure for gender minority populations. A gender minority person who
identifies their sexual orientation as any response option other than “Something
else” will not be “counted” as a gender minority. Yet transgender and gender-
nonconforming individuals, like anyone else, may identify as gay, straight, bisex-
ual, or another sexual orientation; they may be attracted to people of any gender;
and they may engage in sexual behaviors with people of any gender (Grant et al.
2011). The NHIS measure will likely underestimate the proportion of respondents
who identify as transgender or gender nonconforming; thus we do not recom-
mend this measure for population-based research in gender minority health.
Survey designers should be aware that this question was not tested with
the intention of capturing population prevalence estimates of gender minorities.
This question assesses sexual orientation; thus a gender minority question should
always accompany this measure.
         Systematic data collection is key to the reduction of known health dis-
parities (WHO 2008). After more than a decade of sustained effort by activists,
researchers, and policy experts, there is now consensus around the importance
of systematically collecting information related to sexual orientation (IOM 2011;
SMART 2009). Similarly, precise measurement of sex and gender identity is needed
in population-based research or else misclassification bias in sexual orientation-
related data will occur. For example, a natal female who identifies her gender
identity as a woman and who is sexually attracted to men may identify as “straight.”
However, a natal female who identifies his gender as a man and is sexually attracted
to men may self-identify as “gay.” Capturing sex only, without measurement of
current gender identity, would result in misclassification of these sexual orientation
identity data. In addition, the discriminatory treatment that some transgender and
gender minority people suffer may be based in others’ perceptions and under-
standings of gender identity and gender expression or sexual orientation (Gordon
and Meyer 2007; Lombardi 2009). Therefore, data should be collected on sexual
orientation and gender identity in order to fully study and understand the health
disparities people face. Best practices for asking questions related to sexual orien-
tation, including the three recommended dimensions of identity, attractions, and
behaviors, have been described elsewhere (SMART 2009).
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
42      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
General Considerations for Measurement of Transgender
and Gender-Nonconforming People on Population-Based Surveys
Transgender and gender-nonconforming people live in communities across the
country and complete general population surveys; however, they are invisible
due to the absence of measures that would allow their responses to be identified
and compared to those of gender majority respondents. The crucial first step in
building the knowledge base about gender minority health is adding gender-
related measures to publicly funded population surveys that can help charac-
terize the needs of gender minority respondents and enhance the precision of
the measurement of sex and gender differences in population health. The land-
scape of major federally supported surveys provides a key opportunity to gather
demographic information about the US gender minority population as well
as to gather information about the experiences of transgender and gender-
nonconforming individuals across fields of inquiry where disparities affecting the
gender minority population have been documented, including education, employ-
ment, health, military service, and criminal justice. Some of the largest and most
important federally supported surveys in these fields include the American
Community Survey, the Current Population Survey, the Survey of Income and
Program Participation, the National Crime Victimization Survey, the National
Health Interview Survey, the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, the
National Inmate Survey, and the National Survey of Veterans. These surveys
represent important sources of information about population-level health dis-
parities in the United States, including by age, sex, and race/ethnicity. Adding
gender identity to these and other publicly funded population surveys offers the
unique opportunity to compare gender minorities and gender majorities.
Recommendation 5: Build on “best practices” for asking about minority groups
on US population-based surveys: (1) gear questions asking about transgender
and gender-nonconforming status toward gender majority respondents;
(2) offer response options beyond binary “female”/“male” or “woman”/“man”
categories; (3) aggregate data over multiple years to ensure adequate
sample sizes.
Three key issues related to collecting information about minority groups on
population-based surveys are applicable and warrant consideration in the context
of measurement of gender minority respondents. First, questions used to identify
minority group members should be geared toward the majority group. Because a
fairly small proportion of the US population is believed to be transgender
(Conron et al. 2012; Gates 2011), it is imperative that questions included on general
population surveys be easy for nonminority respondents to answer correctly. If
even a small percentage of gender majority respondents incorrectly select answers
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group  * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research    43
that lead them to be classified as gender minority (scientifically termed “false
positives”), the data collected will be of questionable utility.
        Second, questions needed to identify minority group members must be
acceptable to, and provide appropriate response options that resonate with, group
members, even if the questions do not have the breadth and depth desired by
minority group members. At the most basic level, this means offering more than
two response options (“female”/“male” or “woman”/“man”) on population-
based surveys to allow for transgender and gender-nonconforming people to have
an opportunity to identify themselves as gender minorities. This does not mean
all gender minority people will select this option, as some do identify with the
terms “female”/“male” or “woman”/“man.” However, findings from the National
Transgender Discrimination Survey (NTDS) (Grant et al. 2011), a community-
based survey that sampled more than 6,400 US transgender adults, illustrate
the importance of having a nonbinary response option in order to capture the
diversity of gender identities and expressions that fall within the gender minority
umbrella. In the NTDS, respondents were asked “What is your primary gen-
der today?” with the responses “male/man,” “female/woman,” “part time as one
gender, part time as another,” and “a gender not listed here, please specify.” More
than one in ten respondents (n = 860) opted to write in a gender identity that was
“not listed” (Harrison, Grant, and Herman 2011).
        Third, the heterogeneity of gender minority identity and experience that is
explored in community-specific surveys (Grant et al. 2011; Harrison, Grant, and
Herman 2011) cannot be gathered in population-based surveys. Population-based
surveys are intended to provide policy makers and public health planners with
basic information about the needs and characteristics of geographically defined
populations and of large sociodemographic groups within that population.
Thus, unless they are designed to purposively oversample gender minority groups,
population-based surveys typically do not have enough gender minority respon-
dents to produce information about subgroups (e.g., female-to-male Latino
young adults) within the gender minority population. As with any rare population
data, aggregation over years is one of the primary methods for getting a sample
size large enough to constructively analyze the health of transgender and gender-
nonconforming people. For additional examples, approaches, and best practices
associated with aggregation of data, please see the full GenIUSS report (GenIUSS
Group 2014).
Recommended Measures for Gender Identity for Population-Based Surveys
Numerous examples exist of how to collect information about the gender
minority population. Questions that would measure gender identity and enable
survey respondents to be classified as gender minority or gender nonminority,
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
44      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
often used in combination, include natal sex, gender identity, and transgender
status. There are different strengths and limitations to measures and measure-
ment approaches to gathering data about the health and sociodemographic
characteristics of gender minority people. However, which questions to ask in
order to produce data about the health needs and socioeconomic characteristics
of transgender or gender-nonconforming respondents depends upon the goal of
such an endeavor (i.e., purpose of data collection, outcome of interest, population
that one wishes to generalize and serve), the measures already collected in existing
surveys, and sample size considerations (GenIUSS Group 2014). Although future
research is needed, particularly with more diverse, representative samples, there is
already evidence of appropriate measures to include questions that classify gender
minority and gender nonminority respondents in population-based surveys now.
Recommendation 6: When two demographic items can be added to an adult survey
(or, in most instances, a standing measure of sex replaced and a measure of current
gender identity added), inclusion of measures of assigned sex at birth and current
gender identity is recommended.
Collecting information about assigned sex at birth (male, female) and current
gender identity (e.g., man, woman, transgender) is often referred to as the two-
step method to assess gender minority/gender nonminority status. First developed
in 1997 by the Transgender Health Advocacy Coalition for use on a survey of
transgender people in Philadelphia (Singer, Cochran, and Adamec 1997), the two-
step method was subsequently adapted and used in the Washington Transgender
Needs Assessment Survey (Xavier et al. 2005) and the Virginia Transgender Health
Information Study (Bradford et al. 2013; Xavier, Honnold, and Bradford 2007). The
two-step method uses two questions (assigned sex at birth and current gender
identity) to cross-classify respondents as gender minority (discordant sex/gender
responses) or gender nonminority (concordant sex/gender responses). The two-
step method appears the most likely to have high sensitivity as well as high speci-
ficity with adults. Table 1 shows recommended measures for assigned sex at birth (a)
and gender identity (b). It is unclear whether assigned sex at birth should precede or
follow current gender identity; future studies should investigate ordering effects.
        A 2013 study found that the two-step method was far more successful in
identifying transgender respondents than a single, stand-alone gender identity
item that offered a transgender response option (Tate, Ledbetter, and Youssef
2013). This study also found that some transgender individuals identify their
gender as male or female and not as transgender and thus will be missed if a
gender identity measure is used alone. Additional research by GenIUSS Group
members that conducted cognitive testing of survey items supports the validity of
a two-step method implemented using different response options (Conron,
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                                   TSQ
          The GenIUSS Group      * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research              45
Table 1. Recommended gender measures from the GenIUSS group
(a) Assigned sex at birth
What sex were you assigned at birth, on your original birth certiﬁcate? (check one)
      , Male
      , Female
(b) Current gender identity
How do you describe yourself? (check one)
      , Male
      , Female
      , Transgender
      , Do not identify as male, female, or transgender
(c) Transgender status
Some people describe themselves as transgender when they experience a different gender identity
from their sex at birth. For example, a person who was born into a male body but who feels female or
lives as a woman. Do you consider yourself to be transgender?
      , Yes, transgender, male to female
      , Yes, transgender, female to male
      , Yes, transgender, gender nonconforming
      , No
Note—Additional information for telephone interviewer if asked about deﬁnition of transgender:
Some people describe themselves as transgender when they experience a different gender identity
from their sex at birth. For example, a person who was born into a male body but who feels female
or lives as a woman would be transgender. Some transgender people change their physical
appearance so that it matches their internal gender identity. Some transgender people take
hormones and some have surgery. A transgender person may be of any sexual orientation—
straight, gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
Note—Additional information for interviewer if asked about deﬁnition of gender nonconforming:
Some people think of themselves as gender nonconforming when they do not identify only
as a man or only as a woman.
(d) LGBT identity
Do you think of yourself as (please check all that apply):
      , Straight
      , Gay or lesbian
      , Bisexual
      , Transgender, transsexual, or gender nonconforming
If yes to transgender, then probe:
      , Transgender, male to female OR
      , Transgender, female to male OR
      , Gender variant
      , Transsexual
Scout, and Austin 2008; Lombardi et al., in preparation; Reisner et al. 2014d). A
two-step approach has also been used in online research by GenIUSS Group
members in Latin America/the Caribbean, Portugal, and Spain (Reisner et al.
2014e). In 2011, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention added sex and
gender identity data elements to the US HIV/AIDS surveillance system, including
the Adult Case Report Form, as well as to its electronic case-reporting surveillance
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
46       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
system, called the Enhanced HIV/AIDS Reporting System (eHARS) (CDC 2013a).
A unique strength of the two-step method is that it takes into account both natal
sex (biological) and gender (social) processes, which are key for health research
and epidemiological studies of health (Krieger 2003).
         A visual schematic of measurement using this method is shown in figure 2,
illustrated using the two survey items and response options from the 2010 wave of
the Growing Up Today Study (GUTS), a national cohort of more than sixteen
thousand adolescents and young adults followed prospectively since 1996 (Reisner
2013). A gender minority person endorsing a male sex assigned at birth may
identify their current gender identity as female (cross-sex identity), male-to-
female transgender (transgender identity), or another gender identity (do not
identify as male, female, or transgender); all individuals who fall into these
categories can be counted as gender minorities. Further, differences by identity
can be investigated, assuming adequate sample sizes. Thus cross-sex-identified
respondents can be compared to transgender-identified respondents or to non-
binary gender-identified people, or assigned female sex at birth can be compared
to assigned male sex at birth. This item has been tested with “check one” instruc-
tions (Reisner et al. 2014d); however, based on the GenIUSS Group’s collective
experience in the field and work with gender minority communities, additional
testing of this item using “check all that apply” instructions is suggested.
         Since 2007, the Center of Excellence for Transgender Health at the Uni-
versity of California, San Francisco, has advocated the use of a specific two-step
question protocol in health care settings where data are collected by a second party
(e.g., a health provider) (Sausa et al. 2009). An applied example of how the two-
step method can aid in culturally competent care in clinical settings and avoid
epidemiological misclassification can be found in prostate health. Natal males
have a prostate and natal females do not. Therefore, natal males need routine
preventive prostate cancer screening regardless of their current identity (CoE
2011; Deutsch et al. 2013; Feldman 2007; Feldman and Goldberg 2006) and should
also be in the denominator of a population prevalence estimate documenting
utilization of preventive screening for prostate cancer.
Recommendation 7: When valid self-report measures of assigned sex at birth and
current gender identity are not on a survey and cannot be added (or replace existing
measures) and a valid measure of sexual orientation is already on a survey, then the
Massachusetts Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) stand-alone
demographic item is recommended.
In 2007, a single-item measure of gender minority/gender nonminority status was
added to the MA-BRFSS. The BRFSS is a national collaborative health surveillance
effort between the CDC and state departments of public health. Each year, a
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                                       TSQ
Figure 2. Conceptual overview: natal sex and current gender identity measurement using a two-step
method in the Growing Up Today Study 1 (Reisner et al. 2014d).
a
 Infants born intersex are assigned either a female or male birth sex by a medical provider at birth.
b
  The term cisgender is used to refer to non-transgender individuals. The prefix cis- in Latin means “on
this side of,” opposed to trans or ultra, meaning across or beyond. Gender minority would be
operationalized by collapsing people with a cross-sex identity, transgender identity, or who identify
with a gender other than male, female, or transgender.
                                    Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
48      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
household probability sample of adults who can be reached by telephone is drawn
using random digit dial methods. Topics such as health insurance coverage,
cancer screening, and sexual behavior are assessed with core questions provided
by the CDC. States may add supplemental questions to their own state surveys. A
single-item measure that would permit respondents to be classified as gender
minority and gender nonminority was initially developed by transgender com-
munity leaders and research allies for inclusion on the 2001 Boston BRFSS survey.
Analyses of MA-BRFSS data collected between 2007 and 2009 indicate that 0.5
percent of eighteen- to sixty-four-year-old adults answered yes to this question
and were classified as gender minority (Conron et al. 2012). The nonresponse rate
(1.4 percent) for this item was very low; in fact, it was lower than the nonresponse
rate for sexual orientation and much lower than the nonresponse rate for income
on the same survey. A slightly modified version of this item is shown in table 1 (c)
as well as a sexual orientation identity item; together, these questions were
adopted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 2013 as an optional
“sexual orientation and gender identity” module that states can include on their
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Surveys.
Recommendation 8: When valid self-report measures of assigned sex at birth and
current gender identity are not on a survey and cannot be added (or replace existing
measures), and a valid measure of sexual orientation identity is not already on a survey
and cannot be added, then a stand-alone demographic item is recommended
(without a write-in response option) that includes sexual orientation and gender identity.
In 2008, the National Network for LGBT Tobacco Control (now the Network
for LGBT Health Equity) developed and tested a single-item measure of gender
identity and sexual orientation for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota. This
question is a measure of LGBT status and queries about sexual orientation and
transgender identity in a format that allows both aspects of identity to be inde-
pendently reported through a “check all that apply” mechanism (table 1, d). In
2008, this measure was cognitively tested in a diverse sample (including over-
samples of people of color, LGB, and transgender people) in Minnesota and has
been part of the state’s surveillance system since then. Importantly, this item
successfully prevented false positives by steering gender nonminority respon-
dents, including those who did not understand what transgender meant, away
from the transgender response option.
Discussion
A critical first step in building the knowledge base about gender minority health is
adding gender-related measures to publicly funded population surveys. These
measures can help characterize the needs of transgender and gender-nonconforming
                        Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group   * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research     49
respondents and gain precision in sex and gender differences in health more
broadly. One of the challenges that has been raised related to transgender data
collection is the relative value of adding measures that are only expected to collect
data from 0.5 percent of the general population (Conron et al. 2012). This is an
estimated 1.569 million US citizens. Federally funded national surveys collect and
report data on subpopulations and health conditions that affect far fewer than
this number of citizens (CDC 2013b).
        To reduce the widening inequities in health across a variety of social
determinants, including gender, the World Health Organization recommends
that researchers “measure and understand the problem and assess the impact of
action” (WHO 2008). Incorporating gender-related measures that allow for
identification of gender minorities in national and federal surveys will allow
public health data systems to document and understand a range of health dis-
parities by transgender and gender-nonconforming identity and allow for the
development of targeted public health efforts that are responsive to the lived
realities of populations at the highest risk of poorer health. The potential “cost” of
the few survey items that will need to be added is far outweighed by the public
health benefits of the resulting knowledge.
        The GenIUSS Group has identified additional gender-related measure-
ment research that needs to be undertaken. Cognitive testing of survey measures
in Spanish represents a key area for future measurement research. Research with
more diverse samples is also needed, including by race/ethnicity and socioeco-
nomic status. For example, anecdotal evidence and qualitative data (Hwahng
and Nuttbrock 2007; Valentine 2007) show that there may be differences in nomen-
clature for transgender and gender-nonconforming identities based on race/ethnicity.
Further research is needed to determine whether and how differences in the
language of self-identity among people of color impacts our ability to accurately
capture and reflect their experiences in population-based research. Another area
of needed research is how to accurately identify intersex people on population
surveys—people with a “difference of sexual development” or other intersex con-
dition (GenIUSS Group 2014; IOM 2011).
        We have focused on gender identity in this article. However, gender
expression represents an important determinant of health (Calzo et al. 2014;
Corby, Hodges, and Perry 2007; D’Augelli, Grossman, and Starks 2006; Egan and
Perry 2001; Roberts et al. 2012, 2013; Rosario, Schrimshaw, and Hunter 2008;
Rosario et al. 2014; Sandfort, Melendez, and Diaz 2007; Skidmore, Linsenmeier,
and Bailey 2006; Toomey et al. 2010). People with gender-nonconforming gen-
der expression may or may not self-identify as transgender, and they may or
may not identify as sexual minority (Wylie et al. 2010). Survey respondents
can be characterized along a continuum of current and/or recalled childhood
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
50      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
gender conformity and nonconformity. Indeed, recalled childhood gender-
nonconforming expression has been shown to be a critical determinant of health
(Calzo et al. 2014; Roberts et al. 2012, 2013). It is important to note that accurate
characterizations of respondents as gender nonconforming also depend upon the
availability of accurate data about assigned sex at birth. Future research is needed
to identify recommended gender-expression measures for population-based
surveys.
        The GenIUSS Group notes that population-based research is not the
only source of meaningful data about gender minorities. Diversifying sources of
information that contribute to the knowledge base in gender minority health is
important for future research efforts. Community-based surveys represent an
important and valuable source of information about transgender and gender-
nonconforming health. Research that uses community-based participatory research
(CBPR) principles and that works with transgender and gender-nonconforming
communities to identify and address their specific health-related needs (Leung,
Yen, and Minkler 2004) is especially vital for gender minority health research, given
that transgender and gender-nonconforming people largely represent a “hidden”
population. Large samples of transgender and gender-nonconforming people are
efficiently reached through social network linkages to other gender minority
people and their allies. The best example of large-scale application of CBPR
principles with gender minority communities to gather information about spe-
cific health-related issues affecting gender minority adults is the US NTDS (Grant
et al. 2011). Between September 2008 and March 2009, more than 6,400 trans-
gender adults were recruited using multimodal data collection methods (in
person and online) to ensure a sociodemographically and geographically diverse
national sample (Reisner et al. 2014a). NTDS remains the largest sample of US
gender minorities to date. Data from NTDS led to widespread advocacy and
policy changes that benefit the health and well-being of transgender and gender-
nonconforming individuals. Surveys such as NTDS can lead to rigorous com-
munity-based research that engages communities and contributes to transgen-
der and gender-nonconforming health, including methodological innovations
(Reisner et al. 2014a).
        Survey research is only one means of collecting data to assess the experi-
ences of the gender minority population. Clinical settings and electronic health
records (EHR) have been identified as important and underutilized sources of
information about sexual and gender minority health disparities (Cahill and
Makadon 2014; Deutsch et al. 2013). Clinical settings and EHR are particularly
valuable in light of the dearth of comparative data that exist to understand the
health and well-being of gender minorities relative to gender nonminorities.
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                                 TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group     * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research             51
Other sources include administrative data such as the data collected by govern-
ment agencies to monitor compliance with civil rights laws, cohort studies that
offer unique longitudinal and developmental data, and other cohort-related
surveillance systems such as those maintained by the Department of Veterans
Affairs. Addition of gender-related measures—along with measures related to
sexual orientation—to clinical settings, EHR, and other administration data
collection systems represents an important way forward to reduce health dis-
parities and improve population health.
         In coming years, the addition and refinement of questions that measure
gender identity will allow researchers, policy makers, and transgender and gen-
der-nonconforming individuals themselves to add to the science about trans-
gender and gender-nonconforming health and, in time, to monitor and evaluate
efforts to eliminate health disparities and achieve health equity. Such an endeavor
also offers the opportunity to learn more about sex and gender differences that
may be relevant for the health of all people—gender minority and majority alike.
Sari L. Reisner, ScD, is a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Epidemiology at
Harvard School of Public Health and a research scientist at the Fenway Institute at Fenway
Health. He is the author of more than sixty peer-reviewed publications in sexual and gender
minority health.
Kerith J. Conron, ScD, MPH, is a research scientist at the Fenway Institute at Fenway Health.
She is adjunct assistant professor in the Department of Health Sciences at Northeastern
University, and visiting scholar at the Heller School of Social Policy at Brandeis University.
Scout, PhD, is the director of LGBT HealthLink, the health arm of the national community of
LGBT centers, and an adjunct assistant professor at Boston University. He leads one of the CDC’s
eight national tobacco and cancer disparity networks and is a Huffington Post blogger.
Kellan Baker is a senior fellow with the LGBT Research and Communications Project at the
Center for American Progress, where he focuses on federal policy initiatives relating to LGBT
health and data collection.
Jody L. Herman, PhD, is the Peter J. Cooper Public Policy Fellow and manager of transgender
research at the Williams Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law.
She holds a PhD in public policy and public administration from the George Washington
University.
Emilia Lombardi, PhD, is an assistant professor in Baldwin Wallace University’s Department of
Public Health, School of Health Sciences. She has a PhD in sociology and has been examining
                              Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
52       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
health disparities among transgender populations since the mid-1990s and has authored many
peer-reviewed papers on transgender health issues.
Emily A. Greytak, PhD, is the director of research at GLSEN (Gay, Lesbian and Straight Edu-
cation Network), a national education organization addressing LGBT issues in K–12 schools.
She regularly presents and publishes research in scholarly and practitioner outlets and has
particular expertise in transgender youth issues and educator professional development.
Alison M. Gill, JD, is the senior legislative counsel at the Human Rights Campaign, where she
focuses on advocacy related to state legislation, LGBT youth issues, transgender issues, and
data collection.
Alicia Matthews, PhD, is nationally known for health disparities research with underserved
populations, primarily focused on the development and evaluation of culturally targeted cancer
risk reduction interventions. Dr. Matthews is an associate professor and clinical psychologist
with more than fifteen years of experience in examining determinants of cancer-related health
disparities with a particular focus on African American and LGBT populations. Recent research
focuses on the use of community-based and culturally targeted health promotion interventions to
reduce risk factors associated with cancer disparities, including smoking cessation treatments.
References
Bockting, W. O. 2008. “Psychotherapy and the Real-Life Experience: From Gender Dichotomy to
         Gender Diversity.” Sexologies 17, no. 4: 211–24.
———. 2009. “Transforming the Paradigm of Transgender Health: A Field in Transition.” Sexual
         and Relationship Therapy 24, no. 2: 103–7.
Bockting, W. O., et al. 2013. “Stigma, Mental Health, and Resilience in an Online Sample of the US
         Transgender Population.” American Journal of Public Health 103, no. 5: 943–51.
Bowleg, Lisa. 2012. “The Problem with the Phrase Women and Minorities: Intersectionality—An
         Important Theoretical Framework for Public Health.” American Journal of Public Health
         102, no. 7: 1267–73.
Bradford, Judith, et al. 2013. “Experiences of Transgender-Related Discrimination and Implica-
         tions for Health: Results from the Virginia Transgender Health Initiative Study.”
         American Journal of Public Health 103, no. 10: 1820–29.
Braveman, Paula. 2006. “Health Disparities and Health Equity: Concepts and Measurement.”
         Annual Review of Public Health 27: 167–94.
Budge, Stephanie L., Jill L. Adelson, and Kimberly A. S. Howard. 2013. “Anxiety and Depression in
         Transgender Individuals: The Roles of Transition Status, Loss, Social Support, and
         Coping.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 81, no. 3: 545–57.
Cahill, Sean, and Harvey Makadon. 2014. “Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Col-
         lection in Clinical Settings and in Electronic Health Records: A Key to Ending LGBT
         Health Disparities.” LGBT Health 1, no. 1: 34–41.
Calzo, Jerel P., et al. 2014. “Physical Activity Disparities in Heterosexual and Sexual Minority
         Youth Ages 12–22 Years Old: Roles of Childhood Gender Nonconformity and Athletic
         Self-Esteem.” Annals of Behavioral Medicine 47, no. 1: 17–27.
                          Published by Duke University Press

                                                    TSQ
        The GenIUSS Group       * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research              53
CoE (Center of Excellence for Transgender Health). 2011. Primary Care Protocol for Transgender
         Patient Care. San Francisco: University of California, San Francisco. transhealth.ucsf
         .edu/trans?page=protocol-00-00.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2013a. “HIV among Transgender People.”
         www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/transgender.
———. 2013b. HIV/AIDS, “Statistics Overview.” www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/basics.
———. 2014. National Health Interview Survey, “Questionnaires, Datasets, and Related Doc-
         umentation 1997 to the Present.” www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/quest_data_related_1997
         _forward.htm.
Clements-Nolle, Kristen, et al. 2001. “HIV Prevalence, Risk Behaviors, Health Care Use, and
         Mental Health Status of Transgender Persons: Implications for Public Health Inter-
         vention.” American Journal of Public Health 91, no. 6: 915–21.
Clements-Nolle, Kristen, Rani Marx, and Mitchell Katz. 2006. “Attempted Suicide among
         Transgender Persons: The Influence of Gender-Based Discrimination and Victimiza-
         tion.” Journal of Homosexuality 51, no. 3: 53–69.
Conron, Kerith J., et al. 2012. “Transgender Health in Massachusetts: Results from a Household
         Probability Sample of Adults.” American Journal of Public Health 102, no. 1: 118–22.
———. 2014. “Sex and Gender in the US Health Surveillance System: A Call to Action.” American
         Journal of Public Health 104, no. 6: 970–76.
Conron, Kerith Jane, Scout, and S. Bryn Austin. 2008. “‘Everyone Has a Right to, Like, Check
         Their Box’: Findings on a Measure of Gender Identity from a Cognitive Testing Study
         with Adolescents.” Journal of LGBT Health Research 4, no. 1: 1–9.
Corby, Brooke C., Ernest V. Hodges, and David G. Perry. 2007. “Gender Identity and Adjustment
         in Black, Hispanic, and White Preadolescents.” Developmental Psychology 43, no. 1:
         261–66.
Courtenay, Will H. 2000. “Constructions of Masculinity and Their Influence on Men’s Well-
         Being: A Theory of Gender and Health.” Social Science and Medicine 50, no. 10: 1385–401.
D’Augelli, Anthony R., Arnold H. Grossman, and Michael. T. Starks. 2006. “Childhood Gender
         Atypicality, Victimization, and PTSD among Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Youth.” Journal
         of Interpersonal Violence 21, no. 11: 1462–82.
Deutsch, Madeline B., et al. 2013. “Electronic Medical Records and the Transgender Patient:
         Recommendations from the World Professional Association for Transgender Health
         EMR Working Group.” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 20, no. 4:
         700–703.
Doyal, Lesley. 2001. “Sex, Gender, and Health: The Need for a New Approach.” British Medical
         Journal 323, no. 7320: 1061–63.
———. 2003. “Sex and Gender: The Challenges for Epidemiologists.” International Journal of
         Health Services 33, no. 3: 569–79.
Egan, Susan K., and David G. Perry. 2001. “Gender Identity: A Multidimensional Analysis with
         Implications for Psychosocial Adjustment.” Developmental Psychology 37, no. 4: 451–63.
Feldman, Jamie. 2007. “Preventive Care of the Transgendered Patient: An Evidence-Based
         Approach.” In Principles of Transgender Medicine and Surgery, edited by Randy Ettner,
         Stan Monstrey, and A. Evan Eyler, 34–38. New York: Haworth.
Feldman, Jamie L., and Joshua M. Goldberg. 2006. “Transgender Primary Medical Care.” Inter-
         national Journal of Transgenderism 9, nos. 3–4: 3–34.
Ferrant, Gaëlle. 2014. “The Multidimensional Gender Inequalities Index (MGII): A Descriptive
         Analysis of Gender Inequalities Using MCA.” Social Indicators Research 115, no. 2: 653–90.
                                 Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
54       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Field, Alison E., et al. 1999. “Overweight, Weight Concerns, and Bulimic Behaviors among Girls
         and Boys.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 38, no. 6:
         754–60.
Garofalo, Robert, et al. 2006. “Overlooked, Misunderstood, and At-Risk: Exploring the Lives and
         HIV Risk of Ethnic Minority Male-to-Female Transgender Youth.” Journal of Adolescent
         Health 38, no. 3: 230–36.
Gates, Gary J. 2011. “How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender?” Williams
         Institute. williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Gates-How-Many-People
         -LGBT-Apr-2011.pdf.
GenIUSS Group (Gender Identity in US Surveillance). 2013. “Gender-Related Measures Over-
         view.” Los Angeles: Williams Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, School
         of Law. williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/GenIUSS-Gender-related
         -Question-Overview.pdf
———. 2014. “Best Practices for Asking Questions to Identify Transgender Respondents on
         Population-Based Surveys.” Los Angeles: Williams Institute, University of California,
         Los Angeles, School of Law. williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/geniuss
         -report-sep-2014.pdf.
Gordon, Allegra R., and Ilan H. Meyer. 2007. “Gender Nonconformity as a Target of Prejudice,
         Discrimination, and Violence against LGB Individuals.” Journal of LGBT Health Research
         3, no. 3: 55–71.
Gorman, Bridget K., and Jen’nan Ghazal Read. 2006. “Gender Disparities in Adult Health: An
         Examination of Three Measures of Morbidity.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 47,
         no. 2: 95–110.
Grant, Jaime, et al. 2011. “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Dis-
         crimination Survey.” Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality and
         National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Grossman, Arnold H., and Anthony R. D’Augelli. 2006. “Transgender Youth: Invisible and Vul-
         nerable.” Journal of Homosexuality 51, no. 1: 111–28.
Haig, David. 2004. “The Inexorable Rise of Gender and the Decline of Sex: Social Change in
         Academic Titles, 1945–2001.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 33, no. 2: 87–96.
Harrison, Jack, Jaime Grant, and Jody L. Herman. 2011. “A Gender Not Listed Here: Gender-
         queers, Gender Rebels, and Otherwise in the National Transgender Discrimination
         Survey.” LGBTQ Policy Journal at the Harvard Kennedy School 2: 13–24.
Hendricks, Michael L., and Rylan J. Testa. 2012. “A Conceptual Framework for Clinical Work with
         Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Clients: An Adaptation of the Minority Stress
         Model.” Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 43, no. 5: 460–67.
Herbst, Jeffrey H., et al. 2008. “Estimating HIV Prevalence and Risk Behaviors of Transgender
         Persons in the United States: A Systematic Review.” AIDS and Behavior 12, no. 1: 1–17.
Hwahng, Sel Julian, and Larry Nuttbrock. 2007. “Sex Workers, Fem Queens, and Cross-Dressers:
         Differential Marginalizations and HIV Vulnerabilities among Three Ethnocultural Male-
         to-Female Transgender Communities in New York City.” Sexuality Resesearch and Social
         Policy 4, no. 4: 36–59.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2011. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People:
         Building a Foundation for Better Understanding. Washington, DC: National Academic
         Press.
Kenagy, Gretchen P. 2005. “Transgender Health: Findings from Two Needs Assessment Studies in
         Philadelphia.” Health and Social Work 30, no. 1: 19–26.
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                                    TSQ
         The GenIUSS Group       * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research            55
Krieger, Nancy. 2003. “Genders, Sexes, and Health: What Are the Connections—and Why Does It
         Matter?” International Journal of Epidemiology 32, no. 4: 652–57.
Leung, Margaret W., Irene H. Yen, and Meredith Minkler. 2004. “Community-Based Participatory
         Research: A Promising Approach for Increasing Epidemiology’s Relevance in the Twenty-
         First Century.” International Journal of Epidemiology 33, no. 3: 499–506.
Lombardi, Emilia. 2009. “Varieties of Transgender/Transsexual Lives and Their Relationship with
         Transphobia.” Journal of Homosexuality 56, no. 8: 977–92.
Lombardi, Emilia, et al. 2001. “Gender Violence: Transgender Experiences with Violence and
         Discrimination.” Journal of Homosexuality 42, no. 1: 89–101.
———. In preparation. “Examination of Gender Identity and Expression Measures within a Mid-
         west Sample: Results from the Population-Based Gender Identity Measurement Small
         Research Project.”
Mayer, Kenneth H., et al. 2008. “Sexual and Gender Minority Health: What We Know and What
         Needs to Be Done.” American Journal of Public Health 98, no. 6: 989–95.
McLeroy, Kenneth R., et al. 1988. “An Ecological Perspective on Health Promotion Programs.”
         Health Education Quarterly 15, no. 4: 351–77.
Nieuwenhoven, Linda, and Ineke Klinge. 2010. “Scientific Excellence in Applying Sex- and
         Gender-Sensitive Methods in Biomedical and Health Research.” Journal of Womens
         Health 19, no. 2: 313–21.
Nowatzki, Nadine, and Karen R. Grant. 2011. “Sex is Not Enough: The Need for Gender-Based
         Analysis in Health Research.” Health Care for Women International 32, no. 4: 263–77.
Nuttbrock, Larry, et al. 2010. “Psychiatric Impact of Gender-Related Abuse across the Life Course
         of Male-to-Female Transgender Persons.” Journal of Sex Research 47, no. 1: 12–23.
Pearlin, Leonard I., et al. 2005. “Stress, Health, and the Life Course: Some Conceptual Perspec-
         tives.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 46, no. 2: 205–19.
Read, Jen’nen Ghazal, and Bridget K. Gorman. 2006. “Gender Inequalities in US Adult Health:
         The Interplay of Race and Ethnicity.” Social Science and Medicine 62, no. 5: 1045–65.
Reisner, Sari L. 2013. “Gender Identity as a Social Determinant of Health: Methods for Trans-
         gender Health Research.” ScD diss., Harvard School of Public Health.
Reisner, Sari L., et al. 2014a. “Comparing In-Person and Online Survey Respondents in the U.S.
         National Transgender Discrimination Survey: Implications for Transgender Health
         Research.” LGBT Health 1, no. 2: 98–106.
———. 2014b. “Dyadic Effects of Gender Minority Stressors in Substance Use Behaviors among
         Transgender Women and Their Non-Transgender Male Sex Partners.” Psychology of
         Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity 1, no. 1: 63–71.
———. 2014c. “Gender Minority Social Stress in Adolescence: Disparities in Adolescent
         Bullying and Substance Use by Gender Identity.” Journal of Sex Research. doi:10.1080
         /00224499.2014.886321.
———. 2014d. “Monitoring the Health of Transgender and Other Gender Minority Populations:
         Validity of Natal Sex and Gender Identity Survey Items in a US National Cohort of
         Young Adults.” BMC Public Health 14: 1224. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-1224.
———. 2014e. “Using a Two-Step Method to Measure Transgender Identity in Latin America/the
         Caribbean, Portugal, and Spain.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 43, no. 8: 1503–14.
Reisner, Sari L., Zinzi Bailey, and Jae Sevelius. 2014. “Racial/Ethnic Disparities in History of
         Incarceration, Experiences of Victimization, and Associated Health Indicators among
         Transgender Women in the U.S.” Women and Health 54, no. 8: 750–67. doi:10.1080
         /03630242.2014.932891.
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
56       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Roberts, Andrea L., et al. 2012. “Childhood Gender Nonconformity: A Risk Indicator for
         Childhood Abuse and Posttraumatic Stress in Youth.” Pediatrics 129, no. 3: 410–17.
———. 2013. “Childhood Gender Nonconformity, Bullying Victimization, and Depressive
         Symptoms across Adolescence and Early Adulthood: An Eleven-Year Longitudinal
         Study.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 52, no. 2:
         143–52.
Rosario, Margaret, Eric W. Schrimshaw, and Joyce Hunter. 2008. “Butch/Femme Differences in
         Substance Use and Abuse among Young Lesbian and Bisexual Women: Examination and
         Potential Explanations.” Substance Use and Misuse 43, nos. 8–9: 1002–15.
Rosario, Margaret, et al. 2014. “Disparities in Depressive Distress by Sexual Orientation in
         Emerging Adults: The Roles of Attachment and Stress Paradigms.” Archives of Sexual
         Behavior 43, no. 5: 901–16.
Sandfort, Theo G., Rita M. Melendez, and Rafael M. Diaz. 2007. “Gender Nonconformity,
         Homophobia, and Mental Distress in Latino Gay and Bisexual Men.” Journal of Sex
         Research 44, no. 2: 181–89.
Sausa, L. A., et al. 2009. “Policy Recommendations for Inclusive Data Collection of Trans People
         in HIV Prevention, Care, and Services.” San Francisco: Center of Excellence for Trans-
         gender HIV Prevention, University of California.
Schwartz, Sharon, and Ilan H. Meyer. 2010. “Mental Health Disparities Research: The Impact of
         within and between Group Analyses on Tests of Social Stress Hypotheses.” Social Science
         and Medicine 70, no. 8: 1111–18.
Sevelius, Jae M. 2013. “Gender Affirmation: A Framework for Conceptualizing Risk Behavior
         among Transgender Women of Color.” Sex Roles 68, nos. 11–12: 675–89.
Singer, T. Benjamin, Mary Cochran, and Rachael Adamec. 1997. Final Report by the Transgender
         Health Action Coalition (THAC) to the Philadelphia Foundation Legacy Fund [for the]
         Needs Assessment Survey Project. Philadelphia: Transgender Health Action Coalition.
Skidmore, W. Christopher, Joan A. Linsenmeier, and J. Michael Bailey. 2006. “Gender Non-
         conformity and Psychological Distress in Lesbians and Gay Men.” Archives of Sexual
         Behavior 35, no. 6: 685–97.
SMART (Sexual Minority Assessment Research Team). 2009. “Best Practices for Asking Questions
         about Sexual Orientation on Surveys.” Los Angeles: Williams Institute, University
         of California, Los Angeles, School of Law. williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content
         /uploads/SMART-FINAL-Nov-2009.pdf.
Tate, Charlotte Chuck, Jay N. Ledbetter, and Cris P. Youssef. 2013. “A Two-Question Method for
         Assessing Gender Categories in the Social and Medical Sciences.” Journal of Sex Research
         50, no. 8: 767–76.
Toomey, Russell B., et al. 2010. “Gender-Nonconforming Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender
         Youth: School Victimization and Young Adult Psychosocial Adjustment.” Developmental
         Psychology 46, no. 6: 1580–89.
US Department of Health and Human Services. 2010. “Health Disparities.” Office of Disease
         Prevention and Health Promotion. www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/disparitiesAbout
         .aspx.
Valentine, David. 2007. Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category. Durham, NC: Duke
         University Press.
Vlassoff, Carol. 2007. “Gender Differences in Determinants and Consequences of Health and
         Illness.” Journal of Health, Population, and Nutrition 25, no. 1: 47–61.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity through
         Action on the Social Determinants of Health. Final Report of the Commission on Social
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                                    TSQ
          The GenIUSS Group      * “Counting” Transgender Adults in Health Research              57
          Determinants of Health. Geneva: World Health Organization. www.who.int/social
          _determinants/thecommission/finalreport/en.
Wylie, Sarah A., et al. 2010. “Socially Assigned Gender Nonconformity: A Brief Measure for Use in
          Surveillance and Investigation of Health Disparities.” Sex Roles 63, nos. 3–4: 264–76.
Xavier, Jessica M., et al. 2005. “A Needs Assessment of Transgendered People of Color Living in
          Washington, DC.” International Journal of Transgenderism 8, nos. 2–3: 31–47.
Xavier, Jessica, Julie A. Honnold, and Judith Bradford. 2007. The Health, Health-Related Needs,
          and Lifecourse Experiences of Transgender Virginians. Richmond: Virginia Department
          of Health. www.vdh.virginia.gov/epidemiology/DiseasePrevention/documents/pdf/THIS
          FINALREPORTVol1.pdf.
Appendix. Eight recommendations from the GenIUSS Group
Recommendation 1: That standardized self‐report questions about both sex and gender be included
in all surveys of the US population.
Recommendation 2: That multiple aspects of gender be measured in US population‐based research,
including gender identity.
Recommendation 3: That questions speciﬁc to gender minorities be asked using skip patterns.
Recommendation 4: A measure of gender identity does not replace sexual orientation (identity,
attraction, behaviors). Measuring both gender identity and sexual orientation is recommended for
US population‐based surveys.
Recommendation 5: Build on “best practices” for asking about minority groups on US population‐
based surveys: (1) gear questions asking about transgender and gender nonconforming status
toward gender majority respondents; (2) offer response options beyond binary “female”/“male” or
“woman”/“man” categories; (3) aggregate data over multiple years to ensure adequate sample sizes.
Recommendation 6: When two demographic items can be added to an adult survey (or, in most
instances, a standing measure of sex replaced and a measure of current gender identity added),
inclusion of measures of assigned sex at birth and current gender identity is recommended. The
two‐step approach appears the most likely to have high sensitivity as well as high speciﬁcity with
adults (table 1, a, b).
Recommendation 7: When valid self‐report measures of assigned sex at birth and current gender
identity are not on a survey and cannot be added (or replace existing measures) and a valid measure
of sexual orientation identity is already on a survey, then the BRFSS stand‐alone demographic item
is recommended (table 1, c).
Recommendation 8: When valid self‐report measures of assigned sex at birth and current gender
identity are not on a survey and cannot be added (or replace existing measures), and a valid measure
of sexual orientation identity is not already on a survey and cannot be added, then a stand‐alone
demographic item is recommended (without a write‐in response option) that includes sexual
orientation and gender identity (table 1, d).
                                  Published by Duke University Press

