NOTICE:       The copyright law of the United States
(Title 17, U.S. Code) governs the making of photocopies or other
reproductions of copyrighted material. Under certain conditions
specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a
photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specified conditions
is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be "used for any
purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research."
The CDC library absorbs the cost of copyright fees charged by
publishers when applicable and the cost of articles and books
obtained from other libraries. Copyright fees average $35.00 and
fees charged by the lending libraries are between $10 and $15 per
request

                                                    TSQ
From Multiracial to Transgender?
Assessing Attitudes toward Expanding Gender Options
on the US Census
                                            K R I S T E N S C H I LT a n d J E N I F E R B R AT T E R
Abstract In 2000, the US Census Bureau acknowledged multiracial Americans on the decennial
census in an attempt to better capture racial heterogeneity and to more closely align what is publicly
collected on forms with people’s personal understandings of their racial identity. In this article, we
start a discussion of how the census—a major source of political identity recognition and legiti-
mation—could be more inclusive of gender variance. We ask: (1) Is there support for a transgender
category on the US census? (2) Who might select a transgender option if it were provided? To answer
these questions, we conducted questionnaire research at three transgender and genderqueer con-
ferences and found strong support for the inclusion of a transgender category. Conversely, we found
that many people did not currently check “transgender” on forms when given the opportunity. As we
show, the decision to check “transgender” varies by what we term gender identity validation. In other
words, people who identified as male or female and who felt others viewed them as unequivocally
male or female, respectively, were less likely to check “transgender” than people who identified as
transgender or who experienced a discrepancy between their self-perceived and other-perceived
gender identity. These differences suggest that—similar to the push for adding a multiracial cat-
egory to the census—the expansion of sex/gender categories is most likely to come from individuals
who experience themselves as constrained by the existing possibilities and/or who are stigmatized by
others’ conceptions of the appropriate alignment of bodies and genders.
Keywords trans, transgender, census, population statistics, gender identity measurements
I   n April 2010 a media frenzy surrounded President Barack Obama’s public
    acknowledgment that he had checked only the “Black, African-American,
Negro” box on his decennial US Census Bureau survey. One pundit expressed
surprise that Obama, the son of a white mother and African father, would choose
to represent himself as “unequivocally part of black America,” a choice she viewed
as “a holdover from racially ugly times” (Thernstrom 2010). Others supported
him, arguing that racial identity is a personal decision that should not be open to
criticism (Avila 2010). Yet what is notable about Obama’s decision from a social
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly * Volume 2, Number 1 * February 2015                             77
DOI 10.1215/23289252-2848895 ª 2015 Duke University Press
                                  Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
78      TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
science perspective is that he, and all other Americans, even had the opportunity
to select multiple races (Thompson 2012; Perlman and Waters 2002). Prior to the
2000 census, respondents could only select one racial category from a set list, just
as they can make—as of the 2010 census —only a singular response of “Male” or
“Female” for sex/gender categories.1
        Expanding the categories for sex/gender on the US decennial census would
not be without precedent. In 2011, Nepal included a “third gender” category on
their national census, and in 2014, the Australian High Court recognized a citi-
zen’s right to identify as neither male nor female on government documents.2
And the many shifts in race options since the 1790 inception of the decennial
US census demonstrates that the US Census Bureau has responded to transfor-
mations in political ideologies and identity-based activism—such as those that
occurred around race in the civil rights era (Nobles 2000). The shift toward a
“check all that apply” race option on the 2000 US census was an attempt on the
part of this government agency to better capture racial heterogeneity and to more
closely align what is publicly collected on forms with people’s personal under-
standings of their racial identity (Brunsma 2006). Since many people conceive of
sex/gender as more complex than a binary, we start a discussion in this article of
how the US decennial census—a major source of political identity recognition
and legitimation (Baumle and Compton 2013; Thompson 2012)—could be more
inclusive of gender variance. While the comparison between the categorization of
sex/gender and that of race on official documents has limitations —limitations we
address in this article—we use empirical data on the development and use of the
multiracial census option as a starting point for our research questions: (1) Is there
support for adding a transgender category to the US census? (2) Who might select
a transgender option if it were provided?
        In this article, we explore how complexities of gender identity could be
expressed in an official classification system in more inclusive ways. We acknowl-
edge that surveys are problematic for locating personal identity, an unbounded
concept that is a reflection of the self (Owens 2003) and wholly distinct from
identification or classification, which is a more public, bounded, and specific
approach to classifying selves (see Brunsma 2006). Additionally, we recognize that
the term transgender has a fraught history (Meyerowitz 2002) and fails to capture
many people’s lived experiences of gender. However, such classification on official
forms carries important outcomes, as it is used to set funding priorities and to
measure discrimination faced by demographic subgroups (Anderson and Fine-
burg 2001). Our goal is to capture how new forms of identification could apply to
a previously unmeasured population and to discuss how such identification may
generate greater gender protections.
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
      SCHILT and BRATTER    * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census       79
The Census and Statistical Representation
The Multiracial Case
Since 1790, the US decennial census has reported the race of American residents
from a list of predetermined categories. The organization of the early classifica-
tion schemes reflected the ways in which racial ideology intertwined with evolving
political priorities of denoting civil status (slave vs. free), presumptions of bio-
logically based differences, and upholding systems of formal segregation to
enshrine privileges associated with race-specific access to political, social, and
economic resources (Davis 1991; Nobles 2000). While “white” was defined as the
absence of non-European origins, the categories “black” and “American Indian”
included people of partial ancestry and even allocated, in some censuses, par-
ticular categories denoting the idea of blood quantum (e.g., “octoroon,” “qua-
droon,” or “mulatto”). With the Civil Rights Act of 1965, the aims of the census
shifted toward providing a means to track and measure adherence to policies
aimed at ending discrimination. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
began to prioritize racial self-identification (Perez and Hirschman 2009) and
set forth standards of racial classification by which residents could choose one
response from a list of categories or select “some other race” and write in an open-
ended response (J. Spencer 1997; Morning 2003; Saperstein 2006). In the 2000s,
the census again changed to reflect notions of multiracial—rather than
monoracial —identification.
         The change from single to multiple race options came from activists in the
1990s who lobbied the OMB to revise its standards of racial and ethnic classifi-
cation. People’s early attempts to check multiple categories in this singular system
were allocated by census officials to a single race category or the “some other race”
category (R. Spencer 2003; Saperstein 2006), which effectively erased the offi-
cial existence of multiracial-identified Americans. While the US Census Bureau
held up “other” as an option, many people who identified as multiracial saw it
as an empty category that signified a racially nonspecific second-class citizen-
ship. Activists initially sought the addition of a specific “multiracial” category that
would be listed alongside black and white, arguing that such a lack ignored the
changed cultural landscape of the United States, where interracial marriage was
both legal and increasingly prevalent (Nobles 2000). Opponents viewed a mul-
tiracial category as a detriment to the larger goals of using racial enumeration as a
means to remedy discrimination and track inequality. Many civil rights activists
feared the demographic impact of the exit of large numbers of people from the
category “black” to the category “multiracial,” particularly as census-based group
size played a key role in the allocation of resources in public policies (J. Spencer
1997; Farley 2004).
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
80      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
        The OMB opted for a compromise wherein individuals could “mark one
or more” racial categories from a preset list (Nobles 2000). Respondents could
declare a complex racial identity, and the Census Bureau could allocate them to
single-race categories for compliance monitoring and resource allocation pur-
poses (Goldstein and Morning 2002). Yet Barack Obama’s public declaration that
he selected only one race category underscores research findings that people’s
racial identification decisions on surveys are driven by many factors. Estimates
based on the 2000 census showed that only 33 percent of families involving a
husband and wife who selected two distinctive races had children who were
reported as two or more races (Lee and Edmonston 2005), echoing findings in
other studies (Brunsma 2005; Roth 2005; Bratter 2007; Gullickson and Morning
2011). These patterns are framed by historical legacies of racial discrimination that
continue to drive many persons who identify as having mixed-race ancestry toward
single race categories on governmental forms (Gullickson and Morning 2011).
        A person’s decision to select multiple race categories on the census is
dependent on many factors, such as generation, region, individual background,
and social interactions with others. Cohorts born after the civil rights era of the
1960s with parents who report a high SES (usually college-educated) and who
lived outside the South are more likely to select multiple race categories on the
census (Tafoya, Johnson, and Hill 2004; Brunsma 2005). In addition, people are
more likely to select multiple race categories when they report that their self-
identity as multiracial or biracial is “validated” or legitimated by other people in
their lives (Khanna 2004, 2010; Rockquemore and Brunsma 2008). In contrast,
people who identify as multiracial or biracial but feel that other people do not
recognize this identity (in other words, that they are seen as black or as white) are
more likely to select only one race category even when they have the option to
select multiple categories (Brunsma 2006). These findings suggest that a person’s
decisions about racial identification on survey instruments is influenced by per-
sonal identity—how one thinks about one’s own racial identity —and social
identity—how one thinks one is viewed and treated by others in regard to racial
identity.
        A sense of connection to a community also can be what sociologists call a
“push” factor in people’s self-reporting of race identification. Finding a collective
of strongly identified multiracial individuals can push people who identify as
having mixed-race ancestry toward claiming such an identity (Bernstein and De
la Cruz 2009). Yet people with the same idea of their race ancestry may choose
to select only one race in order to politically align themselves with a histori-
cally marginalized group, such as Native Americans or blacks (Khanna 2010).
This political alignment reflects in part how negative interactions such as race-
based harassment and discrimination can push individuals toward collective
                     Published by Duke University Press

                                              TSQ
        SCHILT and BRATTER    * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census    81
organizing, as such treatment often follows being perceived by others as a member
of a historically marginalized racial group (Herman 2004; Lee and Bean 2012). By
contrast, people who identify as having mixed-race ancestry but who do not face
such experiences may perceive themselves as having different options for racial
identification (Lee and Bean 2012).
           For activists, the move toward “check all that apply” in race categories on
the census legitimized the existence of Americans who identify as multiracial.
This official recognition is important, as “the act of naming helps to establish the
structure of the world, and does so all the more significantly the more widely
it is . . . authorized” (Bourdieu 1999: 105). While categorization has the power to
both create and reify particular identities, the refusal to name a category erases
and hides the existence of particular groups (Kertzer and Arel 2002; Baumle and
Compton 2013).
A Transgender Option on the Census: Potential Parallels?
Expansion of the sex/gender options on governmental surveys such as the census
has yet to emerge as an OMB agenda item at the time of this writing. However,
the current public attention on LGBTQ rights in a variety of spheres (e.g., mar-
riage equality, employment discrimination) has brought issues facing transgen-
der people into wider public conversation. Advocates’ push for enumeration is
well under way, and success could signify greater legitimization of transgender
Americans and generate more reliable estimators of the size of the population.
Attempts at such enumeration have been historically fraught (see De Cuypere
et al. 2007; Meyerowitz 2002; Olyslager and Conway 2007). Drawing on an
analysis of large, population-based surveys that “include questions to identify the
transgender population” (Gates 2011: 5), demographer Gary Gates has estimated
the size of the US transgender population as 0.3 percent. Yet it is difficult to assess
the reliability of this estimate, as it is not known how well such surveys capture
this diverse population or how many people who identify as transgender choose
not to do so on surveys for a variety of reasons. Further, we have little information
on whether this push for enumeration on the part of advocates aligns with the
desires of transgender people more broadly.
           A more accurate estimation of the transgender population could have
important impacts. People who can be conceived of as gender variant, whether
this is an internal conception or an identity imposed on them by others, have been
subject to discrimination in many social arenas (Currah, Juang, and Minter 2006;
Stryker 2008). While transgender lives and experiences have increased in public
visibility over the last thirty years (Stryker 2008; Schilt 2010), the lack of reliable
statistics on the percentage of transgender people in the US population can be an
impediment to policy changes. It is population statistics that separate groups seen
                               Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
82      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
as legitimate minorities from “fringe” anomalies. In other words, transgender
people’s experiences with discrimination carry more weight at the level of policy
when they are a “counted” group who can demand federal and state protections.
Inclusion on the US decennial census could demonstrate a kind of “statistical
citizenship” or new form of institutional legitimization for transgender people,
as it did for multiracial Americans, even if the population is small.3
        Yet there are several ways in which including a transgender category on the
census differs from the multiracial case. While people who identify as multiracial
may choose to identify as a single race on their census form, they do not typically
report a fear of potential repercussions of making their identity as multiracial
public.4 The long history of discrimination and persecution of transgender
people (Meyerowitz 2002; Stryker 2008)—particularly by police and other state-
sponsored actors—and the lack of federal protections for gender identity and
gender expression could create fear over identifying as transgender on an official
document (particularly as the census survey arrives through the US mail, signi-
fying that respondents’ locations are known). It may be difficult to allay the fears
of repercussions, particularly for people whose gender transitions are largely
unknown by others in their lives.
        Second, race is no longer legally defined (Haney-Lopez 1995) in the United
States, meaning that anyone can select multiple racial identities on the census
without penalty and without external verification of their “true” race (see Yang
2005). In contrast, the US government continues legal regulation of sex/gender, as
people are tied to the “M” or “F” listed on their birth certificates. This sex/gender
mark is listed on many government-issued documents, such as Social Security
cards, driver’s licenses, and marriage licenses (Meadow 2010). While changing
legal sex/gender is possible in many states, it is not an easy, expedient, or inex-
pensive process. People who self-identify as transgender but who have not legally
changed their sex marker, then, could feel bound to report their legal sex/gender
for fear of “misrepresenting” themselves on a government document.
        While the sex/gender and race parallel is not perfect, there are enough
similarities to suggest that the characteristics that lead people to select one or
multiple race categories might predict (a) support for a transgender category on
the census sex/gender question and (b) reporting one’s gender when given a
transgender option. In what remains of this article, we explore these demo-
graphic, experiential, and relational factors.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
We constructed an original questionnaire that drew on biracial identity research
(Rockquemore and Brunsma 2008; Khanna 2010). We tapped respondents’ expe-
riences of identity validation—a social science term typically applied to racial
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
       SCHILT and BRATTER  * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census     83
identity that signifies the relationship between a person’s personal identity
(the identity that speaks to how one understands oneself) and success in having
this identity validated by outsiders, what sociologists imagine as a social identity
(Goffman 1963). We asked respondents to identify their personal gender identity,
both from a list of possible options (check all that apply) and in their own words
in an open-ended response. For social identity, we asked for respondents’ best
estimate of how other people read their gender expression in a variety of settings.
Such responses do not necessarily reflect the “truth” of how someone is being
read by others in social situations, but they do reflect people’s feelings about how
they are being read —and it is these feelings (rather than verified facts) that
typically motivate social action (Goffman 1963). When respondents reported that
their personal identity and social identity aligned, we describe them as having
a validated gender identity. Respondents could be validated as men, women, or
transgender. When such identities did not align, we described respondents as
having an unvalidated gender identity.
        We anticipated that interest in a transgender census category and current
usage of such a survey category would be most common among respondents with
validated transgender identities and those with any unvalidated gender identity.
Both groups might be the most likely to experience hostility in regard to their
gender and thus be invested in utilizing the state-sponsored instrument of the
census to mobilize antidiscrimination advocacy. We also theorized that respon-
dents’ support or usage of a transgender option would overlap with close ties
or associations with various LGBTQ groups. Additionally, we anticipated that
respondents who felt close to people who had experienced gender-based violence
and harassment and/or who had experienced such behaviors personally would
exhibit more support for a transgender option on the census as a potential avenue
for addressing such treatment as discrimination.
Overview of Data Collection
We applied and received approval for our questionnaire study from the Rice
University Institutional Review Board. The first section of the questionnaire
focused on background characteristics (see table 1). We then asked respondents
how they publicly identified their sex/gender on forms when they could choose
only one option from the list of “Male, Female, Transgender.” Then we proposed a
scenario in which the decennial census offered the following options: “Male,
Female, Transgender.” We selected this particular scenario for two reasons: (1) it
mirrors the current practices of some official surveys; (2) it mirrors the original
demands of multiracial activists for a singular category (as the “check all that
apply” option was a compromise offered by the Census Bureau).5 To gauge
respondents’ attitudes, we presented a set of statements that described why this
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
84       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
approach might be a “good” or “bad” idea. Next, we asked a series of social
distance questions, to gauge how “close” respondents felt to particular commu-
nities, as well as a set of questions about personal identity and social identity.
         We collected data at three conferences aimed at transgender, genderqueer,
and gender-variant people that took place in 2007 and 2008. We sought out con-
ferences that had regional variation, variation in gender, race, and age of attendees,
and variation in cost. Our conference cities were Seattle, Los Angeles, and Phi-
ladelphia. The Seattle conference was predominantly attended by transmasculine
participants and drew a younger (18–34), racially diverse crowd. The Philadelphia
conference was attended by older (35–65), predominantly white transfeminine
participants. The Los Angeles conference had a great deal of age, gender, and
racial diversity. The Seattle and Philadelphia conferences were both pay-to-
register events (between $100 and $300) that took place at hotels and conference
centers, while the Los Angeles conference was free and took place at an LGBTQ
community center readily accessible by public transportation.
         The first author attended each conference to collect questionnaires. Any
person who asked for a questionnaire was eligible for participation. Each ques-
tionnaire contained a consent form and an informational tear-off sheet for
respondents to keep. Respondents were not compensated for their participa-
tion. This data collection strategy did not generate a random sample from which
to generalize; it did, however, provide variation in response to show where the
extremes of positive and negative attitudes toward a potential census question
might lie.
Data and Sample
A total of 167 questionnaires were collected and coded. We constrained our
sample to those reporting a gender identity that differed from their response to
the question, “What gender were you assigned at birth?” with responses for (1)
male and (2) female. The next question asked how they currently defined their
gender identity, with the responses (1) male, (2) female, (3) transgender (either
transman or transwoman), (4) genderqueer, and (5) other (with space for a
written response). Respondents whose current gender identity aligned with how
they were assigned at birth (e.g., those assigned male at birth who currently iden-
tified as men) were omitted from the analysis (15 cases removed).6 We then omitted
an additional 18 cases that provided incomplete information on a census classi-
fication question or how they currently report their gender on forms. Our ana-
lytic sample for this analysis consists of 134 respondents.
Dependent Variables Our key dependent variables are those that address sup-
port for a transgender category in relation to a hypothetical census option and
                       Published by Duke University Press

                                                TSQ
      SCHILT and BRATTER     * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census            85
declaration of whether respondents do/would use the category of transgender
on forms when provided with the option. To assess support for this option, we
asked respondents to indicate on a five-point Likert scale (1 = strongly agree,
2 = agree, 3 = neutral, 4 = disagree, and 5 = strongly disagree) their agreement with
the following statements:
        1    Adding a transgender category is extremely important because knowing the
             size of the group will allow for policies to address the needs of the transgender
             population.
        2    The Census Bureau should add a category because two gender categories are
             not adequate to describe people’s gender identity.
        3    Adding a transgender category on the census is a bad idea because it could
             identify transsexual and transgender people and expose them to discrimi-
             nation.
        4    Adding a transgender category on the census is a bad idea because the goal of
             transsexual and transgender people should be to be seen as male or female, not
             as a separate group.
Based on responses to these questions, we constructed a dichotomous measure
indicating “1” if respondents agree/strongly agree with the affirmative statements
on the transgender option or disagree/strongly disagree with the negative state-
ments. We then created a summative scale, as responses to these questions were
found to be highly correlated (Cronbach’s a = .778) when entered into a reliability
analysis, and thus appropriate to combine into one measure.
        Our second variable indicated respondents’ current practices of reporting
their gender on forms. Respondents were asked, “On forms asking my sex or
gender, I usually identify myself as _______ (if I have to check one box).” The
response categories were (1) male, (2) female, and (3) transgender. This question
allows us to see who is currently employing, or feels they will likely employ, a
transgender option when that choice is provided. We recoded these responses to a
dichotomous variable indicating (1) transgender and (0) male or female.
Independent Variables Our independent variables tap the forces most prominent
in the discussion of the multiracial census question. We control for age with a
dichotomous variable indicating birth after the Stonewall riots (1 = birth year
is post-1969),7 race (1 = nonwhite), education (1 = college educated or more, 0 =
otherwise), childhood family structure (1 = grew up not living with both mother
and father, 0 = grew up with both mother and father), and parent’s education (1 =
at least one parent is college educated, 0 = otherwise). Finally, we control for
gender assigned at birth (1 = female, 0 = male).
                              Published by Duke University Press

                                      TSQ
86      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
        The next set of variables adjusts for gender identity. We asked respondents
to select an option that indicated their current gender identity. We recoded this
response for those who identified as either transmen or transwomen to test
whether endorsement of a transgender census option or reporting a transgen-
der identity on forms was simply a function of stating one’s identity. In other
words, does everyone who identifies as transgender report as such on forms when
given the option? Second, we constructed a variable that indicates how much
respondents’ personal gender identity aligned with their social gender identity
and another that captured when respondents reported that they felt their personal
identity was out of step with their social identity, a situation we classified as
“unvalidated.” We categorized those who reported that all of their identities
aligned in the way they desired as “validated.”
        We then gauged dynamics of social distance. First, we asked, “How close
do you feel to . . . ,” and provided a list of groups that can fall under the LGBTQ
rubric. We also asked about closeness to cisgender men and women. The original
options were “Very close,” “Close,” and “Not close at all,” which we collapsed to
“Close” and “Not close.” Second, we asked if respondents had experienced gen-
der-based harassment or violence. Respondents were presented with two ques-
tions, one that asked if they had experienced any hostility from cisgender
men or women.8 The responses were “Frequently,” “Occasionally,” “Rarely,” and
“Never.” We recoded these responses to dichotomous measures, indicating (1) for
frequently/occasionally and (0) for rarely/never.
Results
Table 1 displays the distributions of the dependent and independent variables
(N = 134). Beginning with our dependent variable, there is a high degree of sup-
port for a transgender census option, but there is relatively weak evidence that
respondents currently use this category when the option is available. Nearly half
(41 percent) of our sample solidly endorse a transgender census option. Yet only a
quarter of the sample currently report themselves as transgender on forms when
given the option. In contrast, more than 70 percent of respondents currently
report their gender as either male or female. In some cases, this monogender
choice reflects how a respondent was assigned at birth. In other cases, it reflects
their personal gender identity.
        The demographics of the sample indicate that, on average, our respon-
dents are forty-one years of age, and 45 percent were born after the Stonewall riots
of 1969. Respondents are predominantly white (79 percent), mostly educated
beyond a college level (61.9 percent). Further, most respondents grew up in a two-
parent household (77.6 percent) and have either a mother or father who has
                        Published by Duke University Press

                                                     TSQ
       SCHILT and BRATTER        * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census            87
Table 1. Descriptive statistics of independent and dependent variables (N = 134)
                                                                         Percent/Mean        Freq.
Dependent Variable
Endorsement of census category                                            41.7                 56
Identiﬁed as transgender on forms                                         25.4                 34
Demographic characteristics
Age (SD)a                                                                 41.1 (13.6)
Born after 1969                                                           45.5                 61
Race (%)
White                                                                     79.1               106
Black/Asian/American Indian                                                3.7                  5
Hispanic                                                                   3.7                  5
Some other race                                                            3.7                  5
Multiracial                                                                9                   12
Missing                                                                    0.8                  1
Education (%)
Less than high school                                                      5.2                  7
HS/trade school/some college                                              22.4                 30
Associate’s degree                                                         9.7                 13
Bachelor’s degree                                                         61.9                 83
Missing                                                                    0.8                  1
Family structure while growing up (%)
Both mother and father                                                    77.6               104
Other                                                                     22.4                 30
Parent’s education (%)
At least one parent college educated                                      53.7                 72
Other                                                                     46.3                 62
Gender assigned at birth (%)
Male                                                                      55.2                 74
Female                                                                    44.8                 60
Gender Identity (%)
Male                                                                       9.7                 13
Female                                                                    11.9                 16
Transgender (transman/transwoman)                                         43.3                 58
Genderqueer                                                               20.1                 27
Other                                                                     14.9                 20
Validation of gender identity (%)
Unvalidated                                                               57.5                 77
Validated male/female                                                     23.1                 31
Validated transgender                                                     19.4                 26
How close do you feel to . . . (% close)b
Transwomen                                                                74.6               100
Transmen                                                                  78.6               105
Bio women                                                                 85.1               114
Bio men                                                                   61.9                 83
                                                                                      (Continued)
                                   Published by Duke University Press

                                                  TSQ
88        TSQ   * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Table 1. (Continued )
                                                                             Percent/Mean Freq.
                                           b
How close do you feel to . . . (% close)
Trans people who “blend genders” w/o hormones/Surgery                         74.6        100
Trans people who are stealth                                                  70.9          95
Transsexuals on talk shows                                                    70.9          95
Transgender activist organizations                                            79.9        107
People who perform gender (e.g., drag queens)                                 51.5          69
Transsexual people who are victims of violence/murder                         76.9        103
Experienced hostility frequently/occasionally from . . . (%)
Bio men                                                                       71.6          96
Bio women                                                                     58.2          78
a
 One respondent is missing on this information.
b
  Reference categories for these groups are “Not close.” Please see table 2.
earned a college education (53.7 percent). In terms of gender, our sample is almost
evenly split between those assigned male or female at birth (55.2 percent vs. 44.8
percent). We find considerable variation in gender identity, as 43 percent identify
as transgender, 20 percent indicate they are genderqueer, and another 20 percent
indicate a monogender identity as either male or female. The remaining 15 percent
chose multiple boxes on the gender question (such as transman and male) or
wrote in answers for the “other” option. Despite this variation, the majority of
respondents (57 percent) report a personal gender identity that they feel is
unvalidated by outsiders. In contrast, a substantial segment reports being vali-
dated as male or female (23.1 percent) or as transgender (19.4 percent).
          Next, we gauge their feelings of closeness to a variety of communities and
any experiences of gender-based hostility and harassment. The majority report
feeling close to nearly all the communities we identified, with the highest level of
reported closeness being to cisgender women, the least closeness to cisgender men
(61.9 percent) and to people who playfully perform gender, such as drag queens
and drag kings (51.5 percent). Finally, the majority reported frequently or occa-
sionally experiencing some hostility about their gender expression from cisgender
men or cisgender women.
Bivariate Distributions
In table 2, we show the bivariate relationships between our independent variables
and our two key dependent variables: percent supporting a transgender census
option and percent selecting a transgender category (if offered) on forms. In the
first column, we show the percent support for the census option by each category
of our independent variables and indicate significant differences (with +),
according to two-way chi-square test (a < .10, two tailed) in light of the small size
of our sample. In the second column, we show the percent selecting transgender
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                                    TSQ
       SCHILT and BRATTER       * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census              89
Table 2. Distribution of endorsement of a transgender census category on forms
and usage of transgender category, by independent variables
                                                   % endorse               % mark
                                                   transgender             transgender
                                                   on census               on forms             N
Total sample                                          41.7                    29.0             134
Generation
Born after 1969                                       39.9                    34.4              73
Born in 1969 or before                                43.8                    24.7              61
Race
Nonwhite                                              29.6                    22.2              27
White                                                 44.9                    30.8              62
Parent’s education
College educated                                      45.8                    29.2              83
Neither parent college educated                       37.1                    29.0              51
Gender assigned at birth
Male                                                  39.2                    25.7              74
Female                                                45.0                    33.3              60
Gender identity
Transgender (transman/transwoman)                     39.7                    29.3              58
Male/female/genderqueer/other                         43.4                    28.9              78
Validation of gender identitya
Unvalidated                                           45.5                    31.2              77
Validated male/female                                 25.8+                    6.5+             31
Validated transgender                                 50.0                    50.0              26
Closeness to Transwomen (male to female)
Close                                                 46.0+                   28.0             100
Not close                                             29.4                    32.4              34
Transmen (female to male)
Close                                                 40.0                    33.0+            105
Not close                                             48.3                    13.8              29
Bio women
Close                                                 45.6+                   28.9             114
Not close                                             20.0                    30.0              20
Bio men
Close                                                 43.4                    31.4              51
Not close                                             39.2                    27.7              83
Trans people who “blend genders”
Close                                                 43.0                    27.7             100
Not close                                             38.2                    31.4              34
Trans people who are stealth
Close                                                 38.9                    34.0+             95
Not close                                             48.7                    14.7              39
                                                                                       (Continued)
                                 Published by Duke University Press

                                                  TSQ
90         TSQ    * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Table 2. (Continued )
                                                         % endorse      % mark
                                                         transgender    transgender
                                                         on census      on forms     N
Transsexuals on talk shows
Close                                                       42.4           26.3      95
Not close                                                   41.6           35.9      39
Transgender activist organizations
Close                                                       38.3           29.9     103
Not close                                                   55.6           25.9      31
People who perform gender (e.g., drag queens)
Close                                                       37.7           39.1      69
Not close                                                   46.2           18.5      65
Transsexual people who are victims of violence/murder
Close                                                       43.7           31.1     103
Not close                                                   35.5           22.6      31
Experiencing Hostility
Hostility from bio men
Frequently/occasionally                                     42.1           33.3+     96
Rarely/never                                                42.1           18.4      38
Hostility from bio women
Frequently/occasionally                                     38.5           37.2+     56
Rarely/never                                                46.4           17.9      78
*p < .05, +p < .10, two‐tailed test.
a
 Statistical difference reﬂects comparison with “unvalidated” category.
on forms by each independent variable and indicate significant differences
between these percentages, according to a two-way chi-square test.
           Although none of our background characteristics are significantly related
to our outcomes, we highlight several findings of substantive interest that might
have been statistically significant with a larger sample. We find greater approval
for the transgender census option among those born in 1969 or before (43.8
percent), white respondents (44.9 percent), and those whose parents are college
educated (45.8 percent). We also find somewhat more approval among those
respondents assigned female at birth compared to those assigned male (45.0
percent vs. 39.2 percent).
           Endorsing the transgender option was significantly associated with
respondents’ being validated as transgender or being unvalidated in their gender
identities in some way. In addition, closeness to transwomen and cisgender
women was associated with support for adding a transgender category. Counter
to our expectations, closeness to transgender advocacy organizations corresponded
                              Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
       SCHILT and BRATTER   * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census     91
to less support for the transgender census option compared to those who reported
not being close to these organizations (38 percent vs. 55.6 percent—a difference
that barely misses significance with p = .105). There was a null relationship between
experiencing gender-based hostility and endorsing the transgender option.
         In the next column, we report the patterns for marking transgender on
forms and find similar correlates. Only 29 percent of the sample used transgender
when given the option on a form. Such reporting is not a simple reflection of a
personal identification as transgender; respondents who identify as transgender
are equally likely to report themselves as such on forms as those respondents who
do not identify as transgender (29.3 percent vs. 28.9 percent). As with endorsing
the transgender census option, respondents who identify and are validated as
either male or female are less likely to report transgender on forms than respon-
dents with unvalidated gender identities of any kind (6.5 percent vs. 31.2 percent).
And underscoring that personal identification alone does not drive identity
reporting on forms, only half of respondents (50 percent) who report a validated
transgender identity also report using the transgender category on forms when
presented with the option.
         Closeness to transmen is positively related to using a transgender category
but not to supporting a census category. Closeness to transwomen shows an
opposite trend: it is associated with endorsing a transgender option on the census
but not with identifying as transgender on forms. Also, closeness to transgender
people who go stealth and people who playfully perform gender (e.g., drag
queens) is also associated with marking transgender on forms but not to
endorsing the census option. Confirming our expectations, experiencing gender-
based hostility and harassment is related to reporting as transgender on forms
even though it is not related to endorsing a transgender option on the census.
The Multivariate Scenario
In the next set of analyses, we evaluate predictors of attitudes and behaviors
around a transgender census option within a multivariate framework. Table 3
displays the results of the multivariate logistic regression models with the like-
lihood of endorsing the inclusion of a transgender category on the census as
the outcome. We begin with a baseline model that adjusts for background
characteristics and consistency between personal gender and social gender, with
those who report being unvalidated in their gender identity in the reference
category. We introduce covariates indicating each type of closeness to gender and
sexual communities, and three emerge as significant; the results are shown in the
remaining models (see table 2 for a list of all communities). In the final model, we
adjust for experiences of gender-based hostility.
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
92        TSQ   * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Table 3. Odds ratios (OR) of endorsing the addition of a transgender category
on the US Census gender question
                                                     Model 1      Model 2     Model 3   Model 4
                                                     OR           OR          OR        OR
Background/demographic characteristics
Born after 1969                                        0.73        0.88         0.77      0.71
Has college education or more                          0.84        0.74         0.80      0.84
Not lived with both parents                            0.83        0.82         0.77      0.81
Gender at birth (born female = 1)                      1.35        1.80         1.60      1.68
Race (nonwhite = 1)                                    0.53        0.62         0.52      0.61
Validation of gender identity (ref = unvalidated)
Identiﬁes as M/F / seen as M/F                         0.37+       0.37*        0.36*     0.38*
Identiﬁes as transgender / seen as transgender         1.09        1.15         1.22      1.14
Close to . . .
Transwomen                                                         2.61+
Transmen                                                                        0.52
Bio women                                                                                 3.67*
Nagelkerke R square                                     0.08       0.113        0.097     0.127
Chi‐square, df                                       8.195, 7      11.739     10.030, 8 13.323, 8
Sample size                                             134          134         134       134
*p < .05, +p < .10, two‐tailed test.
           Similar to the patterns in the bivariate analyses, we find that reporting a
validated gender identity, particularly a monogender identity, is strongly asso-
ciated with endorsing a transgender census option independent of background
characteristics. According to model 1, individuals with a validated, monogender
identity (male or female) are far less likely to endorse the transgender census
option (OR = 0.37) compared to respondents with unvalidated gender identities
of any kind (e.g., whose personal gender identity is not validated by outsiders).
Respondents with validated identities as transgender (e.g., they identify as
transgender and other people see them as transgender) are not significantly
different from the reference group (OR = 1.09). This pattern holds across all of the
following models, demonstrating that is it not a function of associations with
specific communities or with experiences of gender-based hostility.
           Models 2, 3, and 4 reveal that ties to certain communities increase the
likelihood of endorsing a transgender census option. Closeness to transwomen is
associated with a doubling of the odds of endorsing the census category (OR =
2.61) and closeness to cisgender women triples these odds (OR = 3.67). Personally
experiencing hostility on the basis of gender expression is not significant (analysis
not shown but available from the author by request); however, the direction of the
effects depended on the gender of the hostile party. Hostility from cisgender men
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                                     TSQ
        SCHILT and BRATTER           * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census             93
Table 4. Odds ratios (OR) of reporting gender as transgender on a hypothetical gender question
                                                     Model 1      Model 2       Model 3       Model 4
                                                     OR           OR            OR           OR
Background/demographic characteristics
Born after 1969                                       1.72         1.63          1.79          1.76
Has college education or more                         1.21         1.19          1.09          1.11
Not lived with both parents                           0.52         0.48          0.42          0.58
Gender at birth (born female = 1)                     1.34         1.34          1.50          1.19
Race (nonwhite = 1)                                   0.67         0.74          0.69          0.65
Validation of gender identity (ref = unvalidated)
Identiﬁes as M/F/seen as M/F                          0.15*        0.17*         0.13*         0.13
Identiﬁed as transgender/seen as transgender          2.12         1.986         2.19          2.15
Close to . . .
People who perform gender                                          2.42*
Transgender victims of violence/murder                                           2.431
Experienced hostility from
Bio men                                                                                        1.71
Bio women                                                                                      2.316
Nagelkerke R square                                   0.197        0.236         0.223         0.255
Chi‐square, df                                      19.880*, 7   24.191*, 8    22.810*, 8   26.372*, 9
Sample size                                            134          134           134           134
*p < .05, +p < .10, two‐tailed test.
was positively correlated with endorsing a transgender census option, while
hostility from cisgender women was negatively related to endorsing this option.
           Next, as shown in table 4, we moved from predictors of attitudes to pre-
dictors of behaviors. Similar to the previous analysis, we find that respondents
with validated monogender identities (male or female) that differ from how they
were assigned at birth are far less likely to report their gender as transgender
relative to those with unvalidated gender identities of any kind (OR = 0.15). This
pattern sustains across all models and again is the most consistent predictor of
reporting the use of a transgender option on forms when the option is provided.
We highlight the following associations, though all findings are available from the
authors by request. People who express closeness to those who perform gender
are significantly more likely to use transgender on forms (OR = 2.42). Closeness to
several other communities, including transgender activists and victims of vio-
lence, were positively, though not significantly, associated with the usage of
transgender on forms. Additionally, experiences of gender-based hostility, spe-
cifically hostility from cisgender women, were positively related to usage of a
transgender category.
                                      Published by Duke University Press

                                       TSQ
94       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Discussion
Utilizing questionnaire data from a gender-diverse sample, we ask two questions
in this research: (1) What is the degree of support for the addition of a transgender
category on the US census? (2) To what degree is such a category currently used?
We find nearly half of our respondents support the addition of a transgender
category, while fewer than 30 percent mark themselves as transgender. We also
find that experiences with gender validation (e.g., the degree to which one’s per-
sonal identity aligns with how they feel others see them) strongly shape patterns of
endorsement and usage of a transgender category. Transgender individuals who
identify solely as male or female and experience validation in these identities are far
less likely to endorse adding a category to the US census or to use such a category
on official forms compared to those whose gender identities are not validated by
others or those with a validated transgender identity. It may be that those indi-
viduals on the borders will drive the expansion of gender categories. Meanwhile,
those who feel like they fit within the sex/gender binary may see less to gain (or
even something to lose) from an institutionalizing of transgender identity.
         We also find that feeling close to specific communities patterns support
for a census category. Closeness to gender communities that are highly visible
as targets of gender-based violence, such as trans and cis women (Schilt and
Westbrook 2009) is strongly associated with endorsement of the transgender
category. Personally experiencing hostility does not differentiate support for the
category, but it does elevate the likelihood of currently reporting one’s identity as
transgender, as does a sense of closeness to victims of violence and murder. This
sense of closeness with transgender and cisgender women may bring a greater
awareness of gender-based discrimination and more support for using govern-
mental data to track such issues.
         The importance of being on the borders of singular, fixed sex/gender
categories shows some parallels with the experience of activists who advocated for a
multiracial category on the census. In both cases, the underlying principle is making
a challenge to a binary (male/female, white/nonwhite) that does not fully represent
the complexity of many people’s lived experiences. Within the multiracial situa-
tion, people who were unvalidated in their racial identity and/or who felt that
their children’s identities were not accurately represented by singular race cate-
gories pushed for the multiracial category on the census (Khanna 2010; R. Spencer
2003). Yet our data suggest new avenues of research, as the correlates for support
of a transgender option did not always align with the predictors for a multiracial
category. For example, closeness to transgender advocacy organizations was not a
predictor of support (in fact, it was negatively correlated).
         These data do have limitations. First, our small sample limits our ability to
identify statistically significant differences. Second, as we collected our data at
                      Published by Duke University Press

                                                TSQ
      SCHILT and BRATTER    * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census         95
conferences organized around transgender-related issues and themes, our pool of
respondents is highly selective of people who have some attachment to a trans-
gender identity. While those attending such conferences have very diverse under-
standings of gender (as evidenced by our open-ended gender identity question),
our data may be biased toward greater support for a transgender census option
than we might have found from a random sample of transgender individuals.
Finally, the more affluent and educated may be overrepresented in our sample, as
two of our three conferences had registration fees.
Conclusion
Adding a transgender option to the sex/gender question on the US decen-
nial census would be one way to make more solid estimates of the size of the
transgender population, which can have a major impact on policy. This addition
would also provide recognition of transgender people by a government instrument
imbued with the power of determining “who counts” in America, as the census
“plays a key role in reflecting . . . reality” (Kertzer and Arel 2002: 2). As this type of
recognition is intimately tied to discourses and ideologies of citizenship (Nobles
2000), such a move could, like the enumeration of multiracial identity, signify a
shift away from “top-down” structuring of identity categories, allowing new
ways for individuals to organize their identities to guide policies of enumeration.
        However, if such enumeration were possible, how reliable would this
estimate be? Our data suggest that those who are supportive of a transgender
census option and who would mark themselves as transgender are a selective slice
of this community —specifically, those who feel unvalidated in their gender
identities, those who have a validated transgender identity, and/or those who feel
close to victims of gender-based harassment and violence. The size of the
transgender population would likely be underestimated on population surveys,
as those who have validated monogender identities or who do not encounter
harassment may opt out. This potential underestimation runs parallel to multi-
racial enumeration, as selection of multiple race categories is highly unstable
within individuals (Harris and Sim 2002; Harris 2002; Doyle and Kao 2007) and
overlaps only to a limited degree with identifying as having interracial parentage
(Campbell and Eggerling-Boeck 2006). Moreover, transgender as a category may
be insufficient to capture the complexity of gender identity. Adopting a fixed
choice (male, female, or transgender) would only replace the binary with a tri-
chotomy and could alienate individuals who view gender identity as fluid, par-
ticularly people who identify as genderqueer, agender, or dual/multigendered.
        Beyond accurate enumeration, is the addition of a transgender option on
the census a possibility? Certainly it would necessitate a major shift in the popular
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
96       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
(and statistical) understanding of sex/gender away from this notion that it is a
static, “objective marker” (Kertzer and Arel 2002: 6) located in a binary. But such
transformations are not unprecedented, as the shift from understanding race
as based in biology to positioning it as inscribed in social experiences shows
(Saperstein 2012). With this ideological shift, the biological basis of race for
regulating rights and thus for having a “legal race” was eliminated in the United
States. Illustrative of this point is the fact that race is not listed on governmental
identification documents such as driver’s licenses, passports, Social Security cards,
or marriage licenses. While the eradication of a legally binding sex/gender may
come in time, we see the expansion of sex/gender categorization as a more likely
first step toward legitimizing, and addressing discrimination toward, gender-
variant people at the federal level—particularly as some government surveys and
many large-scale health surveys have begun to include transgender as a sex/gender
option. And, similar to the multiracial case, the push for such an expansion may
come from the growth of advocacy groups headed by the parents of transgender
and gender-variant children who seek to see their children officially counted.
Kristen Schilt is an associate professor of sociology at the University of Chicago. Her research
focuses on gender inequality and the workplace. She is the author of the book Just One of the
Guys: Transgender Men and the Persistence of Gender Inequality (2010).
Jenifer Bratter is an associate professor of sociology at Rice University. Her research centers
on population studies, health, and multiracial identities. She has published in Social Forces,
Demography, and the Journal of Health and Social Behavior.
Acknowledgments
We wish to acknowledge the invaluable undergraduate research assistance of Megan Alley and
Noah Tian, who aided in the initial setup of the data used for this analysis. The second author
would like to acknowledge the Woodrow Wilson Fellowship Foundation, which provided time
and support for this project.
Notes
1.       On the census survey, the sex/gender question asks, “What is the sex of Person One?”
         However, in the summaries provided by the US Census Bureau, the data from this
         question are reported as “gender.” In this article, we use “sex/gender” to reference the
         fuzziness of these terms on official forms.
2.       For an evaluation of the impact of this addition in Nepal, see Knight, Flores, and Nezhad
         2015 (this issue).
                         Published by Duke University Press

                                                     TSQ
       SCHILT and BRATTER       * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census                97
3.        We look to census statistics on American Indians/Alaskan native populations as a ref-
          erence for this point. This group encompasses a little more than 1 percent of the US
          population, is highly unstable in terms of who identifies as “American Indian,” and
          includes a wide degree of racial mixture (Liebler 2010). While these facts point to a large
          degree of fluidity and a lack of demographic presence, they have not diminished the
          importance of American Indian community politically or historically, and as such this
          community has been enumerated on nearly every census.
4.        Historically there have been repercussions for selecting a “white” race when an individual
          had any black ancestry. While these repercussions can still exist today, they are no longer
          legally sanctioned (see Yang 2005 for recent discussion of how these issues apply to cases
          of “racial fraud”).
5.        Our research goal was to determine support among a gender-diverse population for a
          transgender option on the census and to understand how people in this population were
          currently reporting their gender identity when given different options. For best practices
          on collecting gender identity on surveys, see the work of the GenIUSS group (2014).
6.        Typically, these respondents returned the questionnaire and noted that they identified as
          cisgender. They also rarely filled out the entire survey, making their responses unusable.
7.        We selected Stonewall because it represents the emergence of the modern LGBTQ activist
          movements. Coming of age in the 1990s, this post-Stonewall cohort would see more
          options for openly identifying as transgender. We theorized that fears about identifying
          as transgender on a government document might be less prevalent in this cohort.
8.        In our piloting of the questionnaire, we discovered that “bio men” was a clearer term for
          respondents than “cisgender men,” therefore we use the term cisgender in the text but bio
          men/women in our tables.
References
Anderson, Margo, and Stephen E. Fineburg. 2001. Who Counts: The Politics of Census Taking in
          Contemporary America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Avila, Oscar. 2010. “Obama’s Census Form Choice: Black.” Los Angeles Times, April 4. articles
          .latimes.com/2010/apr/04/nation/la-na-obama-census4-2010apr04.
Baumle, Amanda, and D’Lane R. Compton. 2013. “Identity versus Identification: How LGBTQ
          Parents Identify Their Children on Census Surveys.” Journal of Marriage and Family 76,
          no. 1: 94–104.
Bernstein, Mary, and Marcie De la Cruz. 2009. “What Are You? Explaining Identity as a Goal of
          the Multiracial Hapa Movement.” Social Problems 56, no. 4: 722–45.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1999. Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bratter, Jenifer. 2007. “Will Multiracial Survive to the Next Generation? The Racial Classification
          of Children of Multiracial Parents.” Social Forces 86, no. 2: 821–49.
Brunsma, David L. 2005. “Interracial Families and the Racial Identification of Mixed Race
          Children: Evidence from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study.” Social Forces 84, no. 2:
          1129–55.
———. 2006. “Public Categories, Private Identities: Exploring Regional Differences in the Biracial
          Experience.” Social Science Research 35, no. 3: 555–76.
Campbell, Mary. 2007. “Thinking Outside of the (Black) Box: Measuring Black and Multiracial
          Identification on Surveys.” Social Science Research 36, no. 3: 921–44.
                                 Published by Duke University Press

                                              TSQ
98       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Campbell, Mary, and Jennifer Eggerling-Boeck. 2006. “What about the Children? The Psychology
         and Social Well-Being of Multiracial Adolescents.” Sociological Quarterly 47, no. 1: 147–73.
Currah, Paisley, Richard Juang, and Shannon Price Minter. 2006. Transgender Rights. Minnea-
         polis: University of Minnesota Press.
Davis, F. James. 1991. Who Is Black? One Nation’s Definition. University Park: Pennsylvania State
         University Press.
De Cuypere, Griet, et al. 2007. “Prevalence and Demography of Transsexualism in Belgium.”
         European Psychiatry 22, no. 3: 137–41.
Doyle, Jamie, and Grace Kao. 2007. “Are Racial Identities of Multiracials Stable? Changing Self-
         Identification among Single and Multiple Race Individuals.” Social Psychology Quarterly
         70, no. 4: 405–23.
Farley, Reynolds. 2004. “Identifying with Multiple Races: A Social Movement That Succeeded but
         Failed?” In The Changing Terrain of Race and Ethnicity, edited by Maria Krysan and
         Amanda E. Lewis, 123–48. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Gates, Gary. 2011. “How Many People Are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender?” Williams
         Institute, April. williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt-demographics-studies
         /how-many-people-are-lesbian-gay-bisexual-and-transgender.
GenIUSS Group. 2014. “Best Practices for Asking Questions to Identify Transgender and Gender
         Minority Respondents on Population-Based Surveys.” Los Angeles: Williams Institute.
Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Goldstein, Joshua, and Ann Morning. 2002. “Back in the Box: The Dilemma of Using Multiple-
         Race Data for Single-Race Laws.” In The New Race Question: How the Census Counts
         Multiracial Individuals, edited by Joel Perlman and Mary C. Waters, 119–36. New York:
         Russell Sage Foundation and Levy Economics Institute.
Gullickson, Aaron, and Ann Morning. 2011. “Choosing Race: Multiracial Ancestry and Identifi-
         cation.” Social Science Research 40, no. 2: 498–512.
Haney-Lopez, Ian. White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race. New York: New York University
         Press.
Harris, David. 2002. “Does It Matter How We Measure? Racial Classification and the Char-
         acteristics of Multiracial Youth.” In How the Census Counts Multiracial Individuals, edited
         by Joel Perlman and Mary C. Waters, 62–101. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and
         Levy Economics Institute.
Harris, David R., and Jeremiah Joseph Sim. 2002. “Who Is Multiracial? Assessing the Complexity
         of Lived Race.” American Sociological Review 67, no. 4: 614–27.
Herman, Melissa. 2004. “Forced to Choose: Some Determinants of Racial Identification in Multi-
         Racial Adolescents.” Child Development 75, no. 3: 730–48.
Kertzer, David, and Dominique Arel. 2002. “Censuses, Identity Formation, and the Struggle for
         Political Power.” In Census and Identity: The Politics of Race, Ethnicity, and Language in
         National Censuses, edited by David Kertzer and Dominique Arel, 1–42. Cambridge, MA:
         Harvard University Press.
Khanna, Nikki. 2004. “The Role of Reflected Appraisals in Racial Identity: The Case of Multiracial
         Asians.” Social Psychology Quarterly 67, no. 2: 115–31.
———. 2010. “‘If You’re Half Black, You’re Just Black’: Reflected Appraisals and the Persistence of
         the One Drop Rule.” Sociological Quarterly 51, no. 1: 96–121.
Knight, Kyle G., Andrew R. Flores, and Sheila J. Nezhad. 2015. “Surveying Nepal’s Third Gender:
         Development, Implementation, and Analysis.” TSQ 2, no. 1: 101–22.
                          Published by Duke University Press

                                                   TSQ
        SCHILT and BRATTER      * Attitudes toward Gender Options on the US Census                 99
Lee, Jennifer, and Frank. D. Bean. 2012. The Diversity Paradox: Immigration and the Color Line in
          Twenty-First Century America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Lee, Sharon, and Barry Edmonston. 2005. “New Marriages, New Families: U.S. Racial and His-
          panic Intermarriage.” Population Reference Bureau 60, no. 2: 3–36.
Liebler, Carolyn. 2010. “A Group in Flux: Multiracial American Indians and the Social Con-
          struction of Race.” In Multiracial Americans and Social Class: The Influence of Social Class
          on Racial Identity, edited by Kathleen Odell Korgen, 131–44. New York: Routledge.
Meadow, Tey. 2010. “A Rose Is a Rose: On Producing Legal Gender Classifications.” Gender and
          Society 24, no. 6: 814–37.
Meyerowitz, Joanne. 2002. How Sex Changed: A History of Transsexuality in the United States.
          Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Morning, Ann. 2003. “New Faces, Old Faces: Counting the Multiracial Population Past and
          Present.” In New Faces in a Changing America: Multiracial Identity in the Twenty-First
          Century, edited by Loretta I. Winters and Herman L. DeBose, 41–67. Thousand Oaks,
          CA: Sage.
Nobles, Melissa. 2000. Shades of Citizenship: Race and the Census in Modern Politics. Palo Alto, CA:
          Stanford University Press.
Olyslager, Femke, and Lynn Conway. 2007. “On the Calculation of the Prevalence of Trans-
          sexualism.” Paper presented at the World Professional Association for Transgender
          Health 20th International Symposium, Chicago, September 5–8. ai.eecs.umich.edu
          /people/conway/TS/Prevalence/Reports/Prevalence%20of%20Transsexualism.pdf.
Owens, Timothy J. 2003. “Self and Identity.” In The Handbook of Social Psychology, edited by John
          D. DeLamater, 205–32. New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Perez, Anthony Daniel, and Charles Hirschman. 2009. “The Changing Racial and Ethnic Com-
          position of the US Population: Emerging American Identities.” Population and Devel-
          opment Review 35, no. 1: 1–51.
Perlman, Joel, and Mary C. Waters. 2002. Introduction to The New Race Question, edited by Joel
          Perlman and Mary C. Waters, 1–32. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Levy Eco-
          nomics Institute.
Rockquemore, Kerry Ann, and David Brunsma. 2008. Beyond Black. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
          Sage.
Roth, Wendy D. 2005. “The End of the One-Drop Rule? Labeling of Multiracial Children in Black
          Intermarriages.” Sociological Forum 20, no. 1: 35–67.
Saperstein, Aliya. 2006. “Double-Checking the Race Box: Examining Inconsistency between
          Survey Measures of Observed and Self-Reported Race.” Social Forces 85, no. 1: 57–74.
———. 2012. “Capturing Complexity in the United States: Which Aspects of Race Matter and
          When?” Ethnic and Racial Studies 35, no. 8: 1484–502.
Schilt, Kristen. 2010. Just One of the Guys? Transgender Men and the Persistence of Gender
          Inequality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schilt, Kristen, and Laurel Westbrook. 2009. “Doing Gender, Doing Heteronormativity: Trans-
          gender People, ‘Gender Normals,’ and the Social Maintenance of Heterosexuality.”
          Gender and Society 23, no. 4: 440–64.
Spencer, Jon. 1997. The New Colored People. New York: New York University Press.
Spencer, Rainier. 2003. “Census 2000: Assessments in Significance.” In New Faces in a Changing
          America: Multiracial Identity in the Twenty-First Century, edited by Loretta I. Winters
          and Herman L. DeBose, 99–110. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
                                 Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
100        TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Stryker, Susan. 2008. Transgender History. Seattle: Seal.
Tafoya, Sonya M., Hans Johnson, and Laura E. Hill. 2004. Who Chooses to Choose Two?
         Washington, DC: US Census Bureau.
Thompson, Debra. 2012. “Making (Mixed-)Race: Census Politics and the Emergence of Multi-
         racial Multiculturalism in the United States, Great Britain, and Canada.” Ethnic and
         Racial Studies 35, no. 8: 1409–26.
Thernstrom, Abigail. 2010. “Obama’s Census Identity.” Wall Street Journal, April 20. online.wsj
         .com/article/SB10001424052702303720604575169783989253108.html.
Yang, Tseming. 2005. “Choice and Fraud: Race Choice and Fraud in Racial Identification: The
         Dilemma of Policing Race in Affirmative Action, the Census, and a Color-Blind Society.”
         Unpublished Manuscript.
                         Published by Duke University Press

