NOTICE:       The copyright law of the United States
(Title 17, U.S. Code) governs the making of photocopies or other
reproductions of copyrighted material. Under certain conditions
specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a
photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specified conditions
is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be "used for any
purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research."
The CDC library absorbs the cost of copyright fees charged by
publishers when applicable and the cost of articles and books
obtained from other libraries. Copyright fees average $35.00 and
fees charged by the lending libraries are between $10 and $15 per
request

                                              TSQ
Counting Trans* Patients
A Community Health Center Case Study
                   N ATA L I E I N G R A H A M , VA N E S SA P R AT T, a n d N IC K G O R TO N
Abstract With the Affordable Care Act revolutionizing the US health care system, the importance of
collecting clinical, demographic, operational, and utilization data has exponentially increased for
community health centers (CHC). Data collection of gender and gender identity presents a unique set
of challenges for medical settings. One central challenge is the conflict between, on one hand, the
need to know and use patients’ preferred names, gender identities, and pronouns to establish trust
and safety and, on the other hand, institutional requirements to know and use patients’ legal names
and gender markers with insurance companies and pharmacies. This essay examines how a community-
based LGBTQ community health center, Lyon-Martin Health Services, collects and reports data about
gender identity and how this process has changed over time. Lyon-Martin strongly supports the use of
the two-step gender data collection method, which allows clinicians to have necessary information
related to patients’ anatomy-based health care while simultaneously honoring and respecting
patients’ gender identity and preferred pronouns. Collecting precise information about patient sex
and gender is vital to providing not only respectful care but also medically appropriate care. The
ability to quantify and justify the services provided by CHCs is a key part of keeping clinics open and
thriving, from securing grant support to implementing internal quality improvement efforts to
provide the best care for trans* patients. The shift toward electronic medical records and electronic
practice management systems is also highlighted, including billing and clinical practice challenges
due to narrowed gender options written into practice-management and billing software.
Keywords trans* health care, health technology, community health center, trans* data collection
W       ith the Affordable Care Act revolutionizing the US health care system, the
        importance of collecting clinical, demographic, operational, and utiliza-
tion data has exponentially increased for community health centers. Being able
to quantify what we, as a community health center, do and whom we serve is
expected, if not required, for governmental reporting, private funders, and
quality improvement efforts. This type of data collection generally includes basic
demographic information like gender, sexual orientation, race/ethnicity, and
income. For clinics and hospitals, this information may also inform the type of
health care received. Data collection of gender and gender identity presents a
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly * Volume 2, Number 1 * February 2015                            136
DOI 10.1215/23289252-2848922 ª 2015 Duke University Press
                          Published by Duke University Press

                                             TSQ
                    INGRAHAM, PRATT, and GORTON    * Counting Trans* Patients    137
unique set of challenges for medical settings for a variety of reasons. One central
challenge is the conflict between, on one hand, the need to know and use patients’
preferred names, gender identities, and pronouns to establish trust and safety
and, on the other hand, institutional requirements to know and use patients’ legal
names and gender markers with insurance companies and pharmacies. These
challenges persist and perhaps even increase with the proliferation of electronic
medical records and electronic health systems.
Gender Identity: One- versus Two-Step Method
The World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH) Electronic
Medical Record (EMR) working group recommends the two-step method of
gender collection adopted by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in 2011 (Deutsch et al. 2013). The two-step, or two-question, method involves asking
on demographic forms about current gender identify first, then about previous
gender (and/or sex) assignment, to honor the importance of current identity over
past assignment.
        This method of assessing gender in the social and medical sciences
is considered more robust than a single-gender question (Tate, Ledbetter, and
Youssef 2013). The authors recommend first asking “What is your current gender
identity?” followed by “What gender were you assigned at birth?” This is opposed
to a single-question assessment—for example, “What is your gender?” Charlotte
Chuck Tate, Jay N. Ledbetter, and Cris P. Youssef argue that the two-step method
allows for greater identification of transgender subjects (almost three times as
many as the single-step question), less missing data, higher response rate (there
was seven times more missing data in the one-step method than the two-step
one), and specific identification of cisgender subjects,1 a data point that is
impossible to extract without the two-step method. While previous studies of
transgender health have reported using the two-step method (Deogracias et al.
2007; Melendez et al. 2006), it is not commonly found in other large-scale data
collection efforts.
        This essay examines how a community-based LGBTQ community health
center, Lyon-Martin Health Services, collects and reports data about gender
identity and how this process has changed over time. First we present a brief review
of Lyon-Martin’s history, current services, and patient demographics followed by a
short examination of how gender-identity data collection has changed over time.
Then we highlight specific gender-identity data collection and reporting chal-
lenges. Finally, we explore future directions and challenges based on the imple-
mentation of electronic medical records and other automated health systems.
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
138       TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Lyon-Martin Health Services
Lyon-Martin Health Services (LMHS) is a nonprofit community health center
founded in 1979 by a group of medical providers and health activists.2 Today, as a
federally qualified health center,3 Lyon-Martin offers an integrated model of
primary care and behavioral health to patients who identify as women and/or
transgender, regardless of ability to pay. LMHS currently has twenty-five full- and
part-time staff members and serves approximately two thousand patients a year.
It serves a highly diverse patient population, including 32 percent trans*,4 49
percent LGBQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and queer), 43 percent people of color, and
approximately 80 percent patients below the federal poverty line. LMHS is also
well-known for its transgender health education program, Project HEALTH, a
joint program with the Transgender Law Center that aims to expand health care
access for trans* patients.5
LMHS Gender Data Collection Changes over Time
As mentioned above, Lyon-Martin’s origin was as a service for cisgender lesbian
women. However, its mission statement and patient population have shifted over
time. Figure 1 reflects the total number of patients from data available from 2003
to 2013.
         These data from the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and
Development (OSHPD) also include gender categories, although there are only
two genders available in these reports. The figure reflects an increasing number of
LMHS patients who are categorized as male. These reports are an example of the
potential inaccuracies in gender data collection. Not only are there only two
genders available in the report; it is impossible to know, based on these reports, if
these numbers reflect patients’ sex assigned at birth or patients’ gender identity.
For example, the increase in male patients could reflect an increase in FTM or
trans male patients if these reports reflect current gender identity. Alternatively, if
these reports reflect sex assigned at birth, the increase in male patients reflects the
increasing number of trans women in the patient population.
Figure 1. LMHS patient population by gender, 2003–2013
                        Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
                   INGRAHAM, PRATT, and GORTON    * Counting Trans* Patients    139
        Our past patient demographic forms reflect a shift in gender data col-
lection as well. Based on a review of past forms, table 1 shows changes in our
assessments of gender, sex assigned at birth, sexual orientation, and pronoun
preference in the last fifteen years. These are based on charts from trans* patients
who have had LMHS as their primary-care home for five or more years. Forms
used before 1999 were not available.
        Additional gender categories (such as genderqueer) were added over time
based on patients’ response to the open-ended “Other” option. Patients are also
increasingly reporting “my name” as a preferred pronoun, though this has not yet
been formalized into our data collection forms. Our most recent revision includes
the addition of a third gender assessment: “For billing purposes if you have
insurance, what gender do they have on record for you?” This allows us to bill
insurances without rejection, since every piece of demographic information
entered for a patient must match what the insurance company has on file before a
bill can be processed and paid.
Current LMHS Gender and Sexual Orientation Data Collection Procedures
Lyon-Martin collects patient gender identity and sexual orientation data at var-
ious stages of the clinical encounter. New patients or patients reestablishing care
after more than three years are asked to complete a patient intake demographic
form that asks about gender identity, sex assigned at birth, insurance gender
marker, sexual orientation, and pronoun preferences, all as separate questions.
These forms are available in English and Spanish (see fig. 2).
        Additionally, patients complete update forms (given at an annual exam or
more often if the patient notes a change in contact information), where we ask
questions related to gender identity (see fig. 3).
        Lyon-Martin strongly supports the use of the two-step gender data col-
lection method. This method allows clinicians to have necessary information
related to patients’ anatomy-based health care while simultaneously honoring
and respecting patients’ gender identity and preferred pronouns. Additionally,
this method also allows for more complete data collection information from a
quality-management and data-reporting perspective. For example, in an analysis
of patients seen from May to November 2013, if we asked only about gender
identity, 30 percent of our patients would be counted as trans*. Compare this to
the two-step method, where, instead, 32 percent of our patients are counted as
trans*. It is also important to note that these two figures reflect a collapse
of noncisgender gender identities (such as transgender, genderqueer, or nonbi-
nary) under one trans* umbrella term. In addition, the two-step method also
makes another option available to our patients: that one can be trans* without
                             Published by Duke University Press

                                                   TSQ
140          TSQ   * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Table 1. Changes in LMHS data collection forms (1999–2013)
                                          Gender Identity              Gender Identity   SAABa Assessed
Year             Form Type                Assessed (Yes/No)            Answer Options    (Yes/No)
1999–2001        Health history           No (see sexual               N/A               No
                                          orientation)
2002             Patient                  Yes (“Gender”)               Female            No
                 registration                                          Transgender
                                                                         (M‐F/F‐M)
                                                                       Other ______
2005             Grant data form          No                           N/A               No
2006b            Patient                  Yes (“What is your           Female            Yes (“What is
                 demographic              gender?” [mark one])         Male              your sex?”
                                                                       Transgender/      [mark one])
                                                                         transsexual MtF
                                                                       Transgender/
                                                                         transsexual FtM
                                                                       Other ______
                                                                       Decline
2010             Patient intake           Yes                          Female            Yes
                                                                       Male
                                                                       Decline
2012–now         Patient intake           Yes                          Female            Yes
                                                                       Male
                                                                       Transgender MtF
                                                                       Transgender FtM
                                                                       GenderQueer
                                                                       Other ______
                                                                       Decline
a
  SAAB = sex assigned at birth.
b
  2006 is the ﬁrst record of the two‐step gender assessment’s use at LMHS.
c
  2006 is the ﬁrst year intersex appears as an option for SAAB.
necessarily having a trans identity (e.g., marking male for sex and female for
gender). For example, a trans woman can choose female as her gender versus
transgender or MTF on an intake form while still indicating that she was assigned
male at birth. This flags the staff to give this patient trans*-specific health care
while respecting her preferred gender identity. While this possibility has not been
                              Published by Duke University Press

                                                TSQ
                   INGRAHAM, PRATT, and GORTON          * Counting Trans* Patients        141
SAAB Answer   Sexual Orientation     Sexual Orientation     Pronoun Assessed Pronoun Answer
Options       Assessed (Yes/No)      Answer Options         (Yes/No)         Options
N/A           Yes (“How do you       Lesbian                No               N/A
              identify yourself,     Bisexual
              sexually?”)            Heterosexual
                                     Transgender
                                     Celibate
N/A           No                     N/A                    No               N/A
N/A           Yes (open‐ended with Some patients wrote No                    N/A
              “sexual orientation” in transgender as
              as prompt)             sexual orientation
Female        Yes (Decline option    Lesbian                Yes              She/Her
Male          introduced)            Gay                                     He/Him
Intersexc                            Bisexual                                Sie/Zie/Hir
Other ______                         Heterosexual/straight                   Other ______
Decline                              Queer
                                     Celibate
                                     Other ______
                                     Decline
Male          Yes                    Lesbian                Yes              She/Her
Female                               Queer                                   He/Him
Intersex                             Bisexual                                Zee/Hir
Other ______                         Gay
Decline                              Celibate
                                     Heterosexual
Male          Yes                    Lesbian                Yes              She/Her
Female                               Gay                                     He/His
Intersex                             Queer                                   They/Them/Their
Other ______                         Bisexual                                Ze/Hir
Decline                              Heterosexual                            Other ______
                                     Celibate
                                     Other ______
                                     Decline
noted in other literature on the two-step method, we believe that it allows patients
to most clearly express their preferred gender identity.
LMHS Gender Data Collection Challenges
Even the more accurate two-step method of gender data collection brings chal-
lenges when collapsing gender categories for internal quality control analysis as
well as when reporting to outside entities, such as funding agencies, foundations,
                              Published by Duke University Press

                                           TSQ
142       TSQ  * Transgender Studies Quarterly
and health departments. For example, genderqueer patients or those who utilize
the self-defined “other” category are routinely combined with both trans men and
trans women in data analysis under one trans* umbrella for reporting purposes.
Additionally, outside entities often want or need sex data in order to match our
records to other databases. We know internally that sex data do not translate
Figure 2. Lyon-Martin Health Services demographic forms (as of August 2014)
                        Published by Duke University Press

                                                  TSQ
                     INGRAHAM, PRATT, and GORTON          * Counting Trans* Patients 143
automatically to our patients’ current gender identities or pronoun preferences,
but other agencies with less transgender cultural competency may not con-
sider or understand this. Thus we ran into a customer service debacle earlier this
year when patient data, including sex but not gender, provided for a utilization
analysis was then used to infer pronoun preferences for a mailed patient satis-
faction survey. Since we had such robust data from the two-step method and
collecting pronoun preferences, we were able to quickly identify which patients
had been misgendered and place outreach calls. Nonetheless, it was a poignant
reminder of how challenging collecting patient-centered gender data can be
when one has to translate them for outside entities that do not have the same
diverse understanding of gender.
         While it is known that binary gender options (male/female) offered by
entities such as insurance companies or government agencies directly conflict
with the wideness of the gender spectrum, we find that this is also true for
other agencies tracking LMHS patients or patient outcomes. Required reporting
for grant-giving foundation and health department data rarely accommodates
patient gender information beyond the binary gender options. This sometimes
means that nonbinary (genderqueer, identifying by name only) patients either get
left out of data collection completely or are misgendered in the data reporting
process by reversion to their sex assigned at birth for data purposes, especially
if they are a part of specific reporting populations such as homeless patients or
Figure 3. Lyon-Martin Health Services demographic update form (as of July 2014)
                                Published by Duke University Press

                                     TSQ
144      TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
HIV-positive patients. Additionally, patients who may not choose to identify as
trans* on their intake forms, such as the example in the previous section, still need
to be counted as transgender for specific grant programs to provide an accurate
reflection of the amount of transgender health care we provide.
LMHS Electronic Practice Management and Electronic Health Records Challenges
As implementation of electronic medical records and other automated health
systems increases, we anticipate continued challenges for accurate collection
of gender data for patient populations like those at Lyon-Martin and, indeed,
all health organizations. The challenge we faced in 2013 with misgendering of
patients during a utilization analysis with an outside agency is one example of the
ways in which automated health systems like those in electronic practice man-
agement (EPM), electronic medical records (EMR), or electronic health records
(EHR) may not be sophisticated enough to deal with more than two genders
(male and female). We have worked closely with the software designers during
our ongoing EHR implementation process to make the systems as flexible as
possible for patient demographic data collection. However, the software has its
own limitations and thus we continue to adapt by making clinic-level procedural
changes or work-arounds in order to ensure that health center staff identify our
patients by their current preferred name and pronoun. Many EHRs also automate
functions based on patient gender, such as which anatomical systems providers
should review with patients. For example, a patient with gender marked female
would have a provider prompt to review for pap smears and breast exams, while a
male patient would be prompted for prostate screenings. Discrepancies between a
patient’s preferred gender identity and anatomical medical needs created by
automated health systems provide a significant barrier to trans* patients’ ability
to receive safe, competent medical care.
        M. B. Deutsch and colleagues (2013), from the World Professional Asso-
ciation for Transgender Health EMR working group, provide specific recom-
mendations for EMR and transgender patients, including utilization of optional
data collection fields within the software as well as means for tracking patients’
gender-related medical treatments and current anatomy. LMHS has utilized these
optional data fields within our current EPM software; we chose to add sex
assigned at birth, patient preferred name, preferred pronoun, and sexual orien-
tation. However, only four optional fields could be added for the entire patient
record, limiting our ability to collect more detailed information on other
demographics beyond what is built into the existing program. The main challenge
is incongruence between preferred gender and the gender reflected on patients’
insurance cards. From April 2013 to February 2014, our schedule pulled from the
preferred name, but this resulted in billing staff having to change individual
                     Published by Duke University Press

                                            TSQ
                    INGRAHAM, PRATT, and GORTON   * Counting Trans* Patients     145
patient gender for each bill. This system was not sustainable with our patient
load and resulted in increased billing errors and automatically denied claims
based on “incorrect” patient information. Currently, the system pulls a patient’s
legal name for all billing documents in order to interface properly with outside
systems such as pharmacies or outside labs. This issue also resulted in the most
recent edits to our demographic form to assess insurance-identified gender. The
preferred-name field is used for appointment interfacing such as searching for a
patient within EPM or appointment reminder calls.
Future Directions and Challenges
We agree with Deutsch and colleagues’ recommendations and hope that pro-
viding information about the challenges we have faced will help other clinics and
hospitals move forward with respectful, accurate gender and sex data collection.
Collecting precise information about patient sex and gender is vital to provid-
ing not only respectful care but also medically appropriate care. The sweeping
changes in health care as a result of the Affordable Care Act have already started to
impact transgender individuals, especially those who were previously unable to
access health care. However, this change also comes with the challenges high-
lighted in this essay, including clashes between legal gender, preferred gender, and
insurance companies and the necessity for individual providers to work around
the binary-focused private or public insurance systems (Murtha 2014). Our ability
to quantify and justify the services we provide and the individuals we serve is a
key part of keeping our clinic open and thriving, from securing grant support to
implementing internal quality improvement efforts to provide the best care for
our patients. The Affordable Care Act’s expanded insurance coverage for trans*
patients also means that the two-step method may need to evolve into three or
more steps in the health care setting, as our most recent demographic form
revisions indicate. All the pieces of demographic data for a patient must match
across systems for the insurance billing process to work smoothly or even to work
at all. For us, that means that we lost the most accurate patient data because of
EPM limitations in number of optional fields; sex assigned at birth was replaced
with sex assigned to insurance so that billing requests would move forward. This
loss of accuracy is small but significant and will become increasingly so as more
and more trans* individuals interact with the health care system under the
Affordable Care Act.
                            Published by Duke University Press

                                              TSQ
146        TSQ * Transgender Studies Quarterly
Natalie Ingraham is a project coordinator at Lyon-Martin Health Services and a PhD candidate
in sociology at the University of California, San Francisco.
Vanessa Pratt is currently a project manager in the Practice Improvement Program at the San
Francisco Health Plan. She contributed to this paper as the quality manager at Lyon-Martin
Health Services.
Nick Gorton is a primary care provider at Lyon-Martin Health Services. He is an openly trans-
gender physician.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank LMHS Medical Director Dr. Dawn Harbatkin for her review
and guidance on this article and Elizabeth Sekera for her insight on the EPM/EHR processes at
LMHS.
Notes
1.       The website for Basic Rights Oregon, an LGBT rights organization, defines cisgender (or
         cissexual) as a term that describes “people who, for the most part, identify as the gender
         they were assigned at birth” (Basic Rights Oregon 2011).
2.       For a full history of Lyon-Martin, see Lyon-Martin Health Services 2014.
3.       Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) must serve an underserved area or popu-
         lation, offer a sliding fee scale, provide comprehensive services, have an ongoing quality
         assurance program, and have a governing board of directors (see HRSA 2014).
4.       The use of the term trans* reflects an adaptation of web-based language taken up by the
         trans* community. The * (asterisk) is used as a wildcard in web searches by acting as a
         placeholder or a fill-in-the-blank symbol. This symbol or representation has been applied
         to gender identification to expand and include “folks who identify as transgender and
         transsexual (the terms usually understood as included when the prefix trans is used on its
         own) as well as other identities where a person does not identify with the gender they
         were assigned at birth” (Jones 2013).
5.       For more information about Project HEALTH, see Project HEALTH 2014.
References
Basic Rights Oregon. 2011. “Trans 101: Cisgender.” www.basicrights.org/uncategorized/trans-101
         -cisgender/.
Deogracias, Joseph J., et al. 2007. “The Gender Identity/Gender Dysphoria Questionnaire
         for Adolescents and Adults.” Journal of Sex Research 44, no. 4: 370–79. doi:10.1080
         /00224490701586730.
Deutsch, M. B., et al. 2013. “Electronic Medical Records and the Transgender Patient: Recom-
         mendations from the World Professional Association for Transgender Health EMR
         Working Group.” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 20, no. 4: 700–
         703. doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2012-001472.
                           Published by Duke University Press

                                                TSQ
                     INGRAHAM, PRATT, and GORTON        * Counting Trans* Patients          147
HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2014. “What Are Federally Qualified
        Health Centers (FQHCs)?” HRSA, US Department of Health and Human Services. www
        .hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/RuralHealthITtoolbox/Introduction/qualified.html (accessed
        November 4, 2014).
Jones, Nash. 2013. “Bridging The Gap—Trans*: What Does the Asterisk Mean and Why Is It
        Used?” The Q Center, Bridging the Gap (blog), August 8. www.pdxqcenter.org/bridging
        -the-gap-trans-what-does-the-asterisk-mean-and-why-is-it-used.
Lyon-Martin Health Services. 2014. “The Lyon-Martin Story.” lyon-martin.org/about-us/the
        -lyon-martin-story (accessed November 4, 2014).
Melendez, Rita M., et al. 2006. “Health and Health Care among Male-to-Female Transgender
        Persons Who Are HIV Positive.” American Journal of Public Health 96, no. 6: 1034–37.
        doi:10.2105/AJPH.2004.042010.
Murtha, Tara. 2014. “The Problem with Obamacare for Some Transgender Policyholders.” RH
        Reality Check. rhrealitycheck.org/article/2014/03/12/problem-obamacare-transgender
        -policyholders.
Project HEALTH. 2014. “About Project HEALTH.” project-health.org/about-project-health
        (accessed November 4, 2014).
Tate, Charlotte Chuck, Jay N. Ledbetter, and Cris P. Youssef. 2013. “A Two-Question Method for
        Assessing Gender Categories in the Social and Medical Sciences.” Journal of Sex Research
        50, no. 8: 767–76. doi:10.1080/00224499.2012.690110.
                               Published by Duke University Press

