                     GASXXX10.1177/0891243215584758Gender & SocietyWestbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough
research-article2015
                                                                                                                  New Categories Are Not Enough:
                                                                                                                                 Rethinking the Measurement of Sex
                                                                                                                                                  and Gender in Social Surveys
                                                               Laurel Westbrook
                                                               Grand Valley State University, USA
                                                               Aliya Saperstein
                                                               Stanford University, USA
                                                               Recently, scholars and activists have turned their attention toward improving the measure-
                                                               ment of sex and gender in survey research. The focus of this effort has been on including
                                                               answer options beyond “male” and “female” to questions about the respondent’s gender.
                                                               This is an important step toward both reflecting the diversity of gendered lives and better
                                                               aligning survey measurement practice with contemporary gender theory. However, our
                                                               systematic examination of questionnaires, manuals, and other technical materials from
                                                               four of the largest and longest-running surveys in the United States indicates that there are
                                                               a number of other issues with how gender is conceptualized and measured in social sur-
                                                               veys that also deserve attention, including essentialist practices that treat sex and gender
                                                               as synonymous, easily determined by others, obvious, and unchanging over the life course.
                                                               We find that these understandings extend well beyond direct questions about the respond-
                                                               ent’s gender, permeating the surveys. A hyper-gendered world of “males” and “females,”
                                                               “brothers” and “sisters,” and “husbands” and “wives” shapes what we can see in survey
                                                               data. If not altered, surveys will continue to reproduce statistical representations that
                                                               erase important dimensions of variation and likely limit understanding of the processes
                                                               that perpetuate social inequality.
                                                               Keywords:	 survey design; knowledge production; sex; gender; transgender
                                                               AUTHORS’ NOTE: This research was supported by the American Sociological Association’s
                                                               Fund for the Advancement of the Discipline, the Clayman Institute for Gender Research, the
                                                               Institute for Research in the Social Sciences, and the Center for Scholarly and Creative
                                                               Excellence. We are grateful to Devon Magliozzi, Emma Joslyn, Sandra Nakagawa, Christine
                                                               Noack, Josee Smith, and Anita Varma for research assistance, and to Joya Misra and the
                                                               anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback. Correspondence concerning this article
                                                               should be addressed to Laurel Westbrook, Grand Valley State University, 1 N. Campus
                                                               Dr. Allendale, MI 49401, USA; e-mail: westbrol@gvsu.edu.
                                                               GENDER & SOCIETY, Vol. 29 No. 4, August 2015  534­–560
                                                               DOI: 10.1177/0891243215584758
                                                               © 2015 by The Author(s)
                                                                                                                            Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

              Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 535
T    he categories offered on surveys and official documents to capture
     key individual characteristics are often taken for granted and seen as
natural distinctions, despite the fact that they, like all classification
schemes, are socially constructed (Berger and Luckmann 1967; Zerubavel
1996). The question “Are you male or female?” is a case in point (Spade
2011). Most Americans are so used to seeing some version of this question
on forms that we rarely stop to think about what purpose it serves, how
we know which box to check, and why there are only two answer options.
   Recently, in response to calls for recognition of sex and gender diver-
sity and for more research on its correlates and consequences (e.g.,
Balarajan, Gray, and Mitchell 2011; Human Rights Watch 2011; Institute
of Medicine 2011), specialty surveys have begun to test alternative meas-
ures of sex and gender. Such studies find that transgender and gender-
variant Americans face considerable discrimination and material hardship,
demonstrating that standard measures fail to capture important aspects of
inequality (GenIUSS Group 2014).
   This new body of work has focused on how best to ask survey respond-
ents about their sex and gender—and what answer options to provide—
but has not yet considered that assumptions about these concepts could
affect other aspects of survey design. Sex and gender are primary, almost
automatic, categorical distinctions through which we make sense of the
world and evaluate others, with important consequences for the mainte-
nance of social inequality (Ridgeway 2011). Thus, we might expect sur-
veys to not only prioritize recording such information for research
purposes, but also be unaware of how traditional understandings of sex
and gender have seeped into measurement practices. We cast a wider net
than previous research and scrutinize surveys in their entirety through a
systematic analysis of questionnaires, manuals, and other technical mate-
rials from four of the longest-running surveys in the United States. Our
examination of how sex and gender have been conceptualized and meas-
ured spans the six decades that large-scale social surveys have chronicled
American life (Igo 2007) and evaluates survey practices against both
contemporary gender theory and lived experience.
   The results reveal potential problems in the survey measurement of
sex and gender beyond an unnecessarily limited set of answer options.
We find that large social surveys generally conflate sex and gender and
treat the resulting conceptual muddle as a starkly dichotomous, bio-
logically fixed, and empirically obvious characteristic. This treatment
is not restricted to questions recording the respondent’s sex or gender;
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

536  GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
instead, it permeates the survey documents. These practices have
changed little over time and have important consequences for socio-
logical knowledge about sex and gender disparities. Knowledge con-
struction is a cyclical process: Beliefs about the world shape how
surveys are designed and data are collected; survey research findings,
in turn, shape beliefs about the world, and the cycle repeats (Bowker
and Star 2000). If major U.S. surveys continue to both essentialize and
dichotomize sex and gender, survey research will continue to produce
findings and reproduce beliefs that are disconnected not only from cur-
rent social science theory but also from the diversity of gendered expe-
riences in American society.
                Aligning Theory and Method
   Creating a survey questionnaire is both science and art (Schaeffer and
Presser 2003). Writing a single question requires as many as a dozen
separate decisions, from whether it should be closed- or open-ended to the
number of response categories and what they should be called (Schaeffer
and Dykema 2011). Some guidelines are commonly accepted, such as that
response options should be both exhaustive and mutually exclusive, while
others, such as the optimum length of a rating scale or whether to offer a
“don’t know” option, are still in dispute or vary depending on the question
being asked (Krosnick and Presser 2010).
   Methodologists also differ in the extent to which they advocate keeping
the same questions, even if they are known to be suboptimal, in order to
maintain a continuous time series on a particular issue (Krosnick and
Presser 2010). Some argue survey measures should constantly be refined
and evaluated for their fit to both theoretical concepts and empirical
observation (Hox 1997). In line with Hox, we aim to consider not only
how major U.S. social surveys have measured sex and gender over the
past six decades, but also the extent to which their operationalization of
the concepts aligns with contemporary social science theory.
   In doing so, we do not mean to imply that there is unanimity in how to
conceptualize sex and gender; theories of the “sex/gender system” (Rubin
1975) continue to evolve across the scholarly community. However, a
broad consensus currently exists, at least among sociologists, on several
key dimensions: (1) Although related, “sex” and “gender” are best under-
stood as distinct concepts; (2) there are more than two sexes and more
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 537
than two genders; (3) how people identify in terms of sex or gender may
not “match” how other people perceive and classify them; and (4) both
identities and classifications can change over a person’s life course.
   Many contemporary gender scholars see sex and gender as distinct,
though the concepts are often conflated in both academic and nonacademic
contexts (Cowan 2005; Hammarstrom and Annandale 2012; Pryzgoda and
Chrisler 2000; Wickes and Emmison 2007). “Sex” refers to the division of
bodies into categories based on genitals, chromosomes, and/or hormone
levels (West and Zimmerman 1987). Although this schema draws on bio-
logical criteria, research demonstrates that the specific distinctions are
neither natural nor stable; our beliefs about sex have varied widely over
time, differ between cultures, and tend to erase naturally occurring differ-
ences in physical development such as “intersex” people (Fausto-Sterling
2000; Lorber 1993; Nicholson 1994). “Gender” typically refers to behav-
iors associated with membership in a sex category (West and Zimmerman
1987). However, gender is not determined by sex, and people can “do
gender” in a range of ways and/or identify with gender categories other
than the one associated with the sex they were labeled at birth. Thus, there
is significant gender diversity within both cisgender and transgender cate-
gories (Connell 1995; Halberstam 1998; Lucal 1999; Valentine 2007),1
gender determinations made by others may not align with how people see
themselves (Westbrook and Schilt 2014), and a person’s sex category and/
or gender identity can change over time (Meyerowitz 2002).
   The ability of survey research to capture this complexity has long been
questioned as part of a larger feminist critique of quantitative methods
(e.g., Stacey and Thorne 1985). Consequently, as Sprague (2005) and oth-
ers have noted, many gender scholars dismiss statistical representations
out of hand, and work detailing feminist methodology often does not
describe quantitative research at all (Undurraga 2010). This has left the
measurement of sex and gender in surveys largely unexamined, despite
critical attention to the conceptualization of many other categories of dif-
ference in survey research, such as race, ethnicity, and sexuality (e.g.,
Powell and Bolzendahl 2010; Snipp 2003), and numerous articles that
offer new measures on other key population distinctions, from age struc-
ture (Settersten and Mayer 1997) to families and households (Randall,
Coast, and Leone 2011).
   Some scholars maintain that survey research can be “rehabilitated”
because it is not inherently antithetical to feminist goals (e.g., Oakley
1998). From this perspective, careful attention to survey methods is neces-
sary because the resulting research is vital for expanding our understanding
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

538   GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
of the gender system, working to reduce gender inequalities, and providing
entry into policy debates (e.g., Williams 2006). However, feminists work-
ing to improve surveys have thus far focused on issues such as the patriar-
chal definition of household “heads” (Oakley and Oakley 1979) or how to
incorporate intersectional perspectives in survey research (Harnois 2013)
rather than on the measurement of sex and gender itself.2
   The recent push for new sex and gender measures has come largely
from activists and academics outside the social sciences, including legal
scholars and those in public health fields. A clear sense of best practices
for data collection has yet to coalesce (but see GenIUSS Group 2014),
with recommendations ranging from adding intersex, transgender, gender-
queer, or open-ended response options to asking separate questions for sex
assigned at birth, current gender identity, and/or gender expression (Cruz
2014; Harrison, Grant, and Herman 2011; Schilt and Bratter 2015). Most
of this work takes issue with the fact that people outside current sex and/
or gender norms cannot select a response that reflects their identities and
lived experiences but stops short of presenting a broader critique of the
conceptualization of sex and gender in surveys. This research also tends
to focus on capturing diversity within the category of “transgender,” but
leaves the traditional categories of “male” and “female” unquestioned.
   We agree that asking separate questions about sex and gender and
offering more than two answer options are important steps toward better
aligning survey research practice with gender theory and lived experience
(see Saperstein, Westbrook, and Magliozzi 2015). However, a systematic
investigation of how major social surveys conceptualize sex and gender is
also necessary to determine if survey research methods are simply in need
of a little renovation, or whether a more thorough rethinking of measure-
ment practices is in order.
                                          Methods
   Our data come from a larger study of the materials pertaining to the
measurement of sex, gender, race, ethnicity, and sexuality from four of the
largest, longest-running, and most influential social surveys with national
sampling frames in the United States: the American National Election
Study (ANES), Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), General Social
Survey (GSS), and 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY).
Long-running and well-regarded surveys are important to analyze because,
in addition to the wide dissemination of their findings, they serve as
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 539
models for newer surveys and are often used to train students in statistical
methods. As the National Opinion Research Center advertises on its web-
site, “more than 22,000 journal articles, books, and PhD dissertations are
based on the GSS; and about 400,000 students use the GSS in their classes
each year.”3
    We collected all of the questionnaires, codebooks, interviewer instruc-
tions, and user’s guides produced by each survey and made available
online for every round of interviews from their inception to 2011, repre-
senting a total of 132 survey-years. The documents for each survey-year
ranged from 37 to more than 3,000 pages, with most being more than 200
pages. They capture all of the information the typical researcher would
have access to when using these surveys for secondary data analysis.
Thus, our investigation considers both what researchers can know about
how the major U.S. social surveys conceptualize and measure categories
of difference and what they cannot know because the information was
either not written down or not made publicly available. See Table 1 for
more details on each survey.
    This study combines techniques from textual and discourse analysis
with those from traditional content analysis (Mills 1997; Neuendorf 2002;
Titscher et al. 2000). To explore the operationalization of sex and gender,
each document was examined in its entirety for passages and questions of
interest. We also searched each document for 30 keywords, including: sex,
gender, fe/male, wo/man, wo/men, masculine, feminine, boy, girl, son,
daughter, intersex, transgender, transsexual, and gendered pronouns (s/he,
him, her, etc.). To provide a sense of how common these terms were in
each survey-year, we kept counts for each of our gendered search terms
and 16 additional gender-neutral terms (including spouse, partner, parent,
and child). Table 1 provides the average number of each type of term per
page. Our counts demonstrate that all four surveys are packed with gen-
dered language, with some (PSID) more strongly gendered than others
(GSS). This quantitative variation might suggest the four surveys differ in
their conception of sex and gender, but our qualitative analysis finds little
difference in measurement practices over time and across surveys.
Although the frequency of gendered terminology varies by survey, how it
is deployed does not.
    Text was extracted for qualitative coding (in one or more pages) when
it related to the measurement of sex and/or gender. For the purposes of
this analysis, “measurement” includes any moment where respond-
ents or others were put in a sex or gender category and counted. We also
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

540    GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
Table 1:  Characteristics of Studied Surveys
                         American                Panel Study                                 National
                          National                 of Income                               Longitudinal
                     Election Study                Dynamics General Social                  Survey of
                           (ANES)                     (PSID)          Survey (GSS) Youth (NLSY)
Years active        1948–present 1968–present 1972–present 1979–present
Survey design       Cross-sectional, Longitudinal Cross-sectional; Longitudinal
                      pre- and                                         three-wave
                      post-election                                    panel studies
                      interviews;                                      post-2006
                      occasional
                      multiyear
                      panel studies
Sample size         About 1,500                Began with            About 1,500 Began with
                      U.S. eligible               4,800                U.S. adults         12,686
                      voters                      households           living in           14-to-22
                                                                       households          year olds
Research impact*         >6,300                      3,760            >22,000               >6,000
Survey-years                     39                       39                   30                24
Pages of                 35,470                   17,539                   8,689             8,462
  documentation
Sex/gender                    454                       436                  326               145
  excerpts
Gendered terms               0.93                        4.2                 0.85              1.26
  per page
  (average)
Gender-neutral               0.90                       1.41                 0.60              2.81
  terms per page
  (average)
*Research impact is defined as the number of books, journal articles, book chapters, dis-
sertations, and reports listed on each survey’s website.
collected content that indicated the range of sex and gender categories in
each survey-year, such as when the questionnaire provided examples of
possible pronouns or included terms such as “husband/wife” and “brother/
sister.” Beliefs about gendered behavior are also evident in the survey mate-
rials (such as what jobs men or women should have, who should do house-
work, etc.), but we did not analyze aspects of the surveys that reflected
gendered beliefs without directly affecting the measurement of sex or gen-
der because they have been documented elsewhere (e.g., Brewster and
Padavic 2000). We instead focus on what often gets taken for granted even
                    Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

                Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 541
in such studies—the implicit first step in any gendered analysis: What are
the available categories and how do surveys decide who belongs in them?
   To capture trends in how each survey conceptualized sex and gender,
we extracted one example of each type of gendering present in a given
survey-year.4 For example, in 1993, the NLSY included more than 300
questions about the respondent’s “husband/wife,” but we extracted only
the first example for coding because the number of categories and the
criteria for membership in those categories were the same for each ques-
tion. If, in the same year, the same survey also used a different conceptu-
alization, such as referencing the respondent’s “husband/wife/partner,” we
collected that example as well to capture the range of conceptualizations
that existed in the same survey-year. Following the parameters described
above, we collected and analyzed 1,361 extracts—an average of about 10
distinct types of gendering per survey-year.
   Gendering takes diverse forms in these surveys. About one-fifth of the
excerpts relate to the direct determination of the respondent’s sex or gender.
The remaining four-fifths consist of more hidden gender categorizations.5
These include the use of gendered pronouns and gendered answers to ques-
tions about with whom the respondent lived as a child (e.g., aunt or uncle).
   Each question, variable description, or text excerpt (all of which will
be referred to as “excerpts” in this article) was coded using Atlas.ti, a
qualitative data analysis software program ideal for handling projects
with a large number of primary documents. Codes were developed induc-
tively to respond to patterns that emerged from the data. We generated a
total of 217 codes, clustered into 25 questions, including whether the
terms “sex” or “gender” were used explicitly, who determined the sex or
gender of the person in question (i.e., respondent, interviewer, etc.), how
many categories were given (i.e., male and female only, or were there
other options), and how much (if any) instruction was provided for how
to make the categorization.
   Our data are limited in the sense that we cannot speak directly to the
motivations of the survey designers unless explanations were provided in
the available materials. Nevertheless, it is equally if not more important to
consider the consequences of such design decisions in terms of the sur-
veys’ abilities to reflect current gendered experiences and gender theories.
Our analysis of the methodological decisions made by four major U.S.
social surveys as to which aspects of sex and gender to measure, how to
measure them, and which gendered ways of being to acknowledge illumi-
nates a broader set of issues that should be taken into account by those
seeking to improve social surveys.
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

542   GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
                   MEASURING Sex and Gender
                               in Social Surveys
   The surveys we examined all operationalize sex and gender as binary,
composed of males and females only, and as givens rather than socially
constructed systems of classification. The answer options for direct deter-
mination of the respondent’s sex or gender are always “male” and
“female.” There are never additional sex options (such as “intersex”) or
additional gender options (such as “transgender”). Although such findings
are not particularly surprising, they stand in contrast to other commonly
asked demographic questions. Characteristics from race to political affilia-
tion are no longer counted as binary distinctions, and possible responses
often include the category “other” to acknowledge the difficulty of creating
an exhaustive preset list of survey responses (Krosnick and Presser 2010).
By always providing the same two-answer options, surveys imply that the
categories “male” and “female” cover all possible ways of being.
   The limited answer options should be a concern for those seeking to
improve surveys, but we find additional ways in which these surveys
reflect understandings that are not in line with contemporary gender the-
ory or lived experiences. All four surveys conflate sex and gender, do not
distinguish between self-identified and other-determined gender, treat sex
and gender as obvious, and do not allow a person’s gender to change over
time. These essentialist conceptions are not limited to direct questions
about the respondent, but instead are found throughout the documenta-
tion. Binary categorization is both ubiquitous and hidden, emphasizing
the need for a careful examination of entire surveys as an important step
on the path to rehabilitation.
Conflating Sex and Gender
   Unlike gender theories that treat sex and gender as analytically distinct,
the surveys we examined tend to treat sex and gender as synonymous.
Even when surveys say they are measuring gender, they are actually
measuring sex or some unstated combination of the two. Questions that
reference the respondent’s gender always use the sex terms “male” and
“female” as response categories (see Figure 1), rather than gender terms
such as “man,” “woman,” “masculine,” “feminine,” “cisgender,” and
“transgender.” Surveys also conflate the two concepts by using the word
“sex” in the question wording but “gender” in the variable name and vice
versa, or using the terms interchangeably in the same paragraph. The
excerpt in Figure 1 is typical, where the variable is called “SEX,” but the
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 543
Figure 1:  Conflating Sex and Gender
Source: GSS, 2008, Ballot 1, p. 23.
interviewer is told to “SELECT GENDER OF CHOSEN RESPONDENT.”
We use the term “sex/gender” in the remainder of the article to refer to the
surveys’ fuzzy operationalization of these concepts.
   Further evidence of conceptual conflation is the absence of questions
that capture the separate concepts of sex and gender; the surveys we
examined only ever ask about a person’s sex or their gender without
acknowledging the potential difference between the two. This is a prob-
lem because it means researchers cannot disentangle which concept is
actually being captured by the variable. For example, although most
health research has focused on biological difference (sex), social expecta-
tions for behavior (gender) also shape health outcomes, and failing to
distinguish between the two results in missed opportunities for under-
standing health disparities (Bird and Rieker 2008). Whether sex and gen-
der have similar or different effects on a particular outcome is an important
empirical question, but that question cannot be answered with a single
measure of sex/gender.
   Encouraging the practice of distinguishing between sex and gender
(while recognizing both as socially constructed) is an important step
toward capturing population diversity and facilitating the use of survey
data to study sex and gender as social systems. One such method is to ask
separate questions about a respondent’s sex and gender, a practice that has
become common among surveys seeking to identify transgender respond-
ents (GenIUSS Group 2014).6 Depending on the purpose of the survey,
this could include questions about sex at birth, current gender identity,
and/or assessments of how respondents rate themselves on scales of mas-
culinity and femininity.
Essentializing the Respondent’s Sex/Gender
   In addition to conflating sex and gender, these surveys treat the
resulting mash-up of sex/gender as a natural or essential characteristic
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

544   GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
                                INTERVIEWER’S SUPPLEMENT
D25. Respondent’s sex is:                1. Male           2. Female
D26. Respondent’s race is:               1. White          2. Negro           Other:__________________
D27. Relationship of R to head:          1. Is head        2. Is wife         Other:__________________
Figure 2:  Interviewer Determination of Respondent Characteristics
Source: ANES, 1966, Post-election Questionnaire, p. 42.
of all people. We highlight three essentialist practices that are typically
overlooked in previous research: Respondents are rarely allowed to
self-identify, sex/gender is assumed to be “obvious,” and there is little
to no acknowledgement that an individual’s sex/gender can change
over time.
Who Determines Gender?  Gender scholars highlight distinctions between
self-identification of gender and other people’s determinations of a per-
son’s gender. “Determining gender” is the corollary to “doing gender.” We
all “do gender” so as to be read as members of a gender category and
others “determine” our gender, placing us into the category they perceive
to be most appropriate (Westbrook and Schilt 2014). However, self-iden-
tified gender and other-determined gender do not always “match.” For
example, transgender women and masculine cisgender women both iden-
tify as women but might be seen as men by others in public restrooms
(Cavanagh 2010). Ideally, to align with contemporary gender theory,
research should distinguish between these two methods of categorization
by measuring both self-identified gender and how others perceive the
respondent. The surveys we examined do not do so.
    The interviewer determines the sex/gender of the respondent without
asking in nearly every survey-year we examined. This count includes
instances when it is explicitly stated that the interviewer should code the
respondent’s sex/gender “by observation,” when the interviewer classifies
the respondent after completing the interview in a special section titled
“interviewer remarks” or “interviewer’s supplement” (Figure 2), and
survey-years where the respondent’s sex/gender was carried forward from
a previous year when the past classification was done by observation.
Only the 2008–2009 ANES allowed all respondents to self-identify in
response to a direct sex/gender categorization question (Figure 3).
However, this does not appear to represent a long-term change in prac-
tice.7 If anything, the measurement modification was prompted by a
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 545
Figure 3:  Self-Identified Sex/Gender on an Internet Survey
Source: ANES, 2008–2009, Questionnaire (Wave 1), p. 53.
change in interview mode. The ANES typically employs in-person and
some telephone interviews, but respondents completed the portion of the
2008–2009 survey that included their sex/gender categorization online.
Interviewer classifications cannot be collected in a self-administered
Internet survey—a point that has important implications for research on
sex and gender as other surveys make the switch to online modes over
traditional telephone and face-to-face interviews.
   The current reliance on interviewer-determined sex/gender raises sev-
eral other issues for those seeking to rehabilitate surveys and makes it
clear that adding answer options to sex/gender questions will not fully
address the limitations of current survey practices. When interviewers
record their perceptions without asking, respondents are unlikely to know
that they are being categorized and so cannot challenge the interviewer’s
determination or opt-out of the practice of sex/gender classification. Also,
if only new answer options are added, it is the interviewer’s perception of
the respondent’s intersex or transgender status would be recorded, rather
than the respondent’s self-identification.
Sex/Gender as Obvious.  Recording respondents’ sex/gender based solely
on interviewer observation implies it is an obvious characteristic.
Interviewers are expected to be able to look at respondents, or listen to
their voices over the telephone, and easily categorize them as male or
female. Further evidence of this essentialist conception of sex/gender is
the general lack of instruction regarding how to decide whether a person
is male or female. Sex/gender is treated as obvious to everyone: to the
interviewer, who is rarely given criteria to use in labeling the respondent;
to the respondent, who is given no instructions for how to determine the
gender of others; and to the researcher, who is seldom told how sex/gen-
der is operationalized under any circumstances. As a result of these omis-
sions, researchers interested in studying the effects of sex or gender on
other processes have no way of knowing which criteria were used to make
the categorization (i.e., secondary sex characteristics, gendered behavior,
voice timbre, clothing, etc.).
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

546   GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
Figure 4:  Instructions for Determining Sex
Source: NLSY, 1978, Interviewer Instructions, Household Screening, p. 93.
   In most direct sex/gender questions, the interviewer is simply instructed
to record the respondent’s sex/gender “by observation.” In rare cases, this
is accompanied by the prompt to “ask if not obvious.” The most extensive
instructions appeared in the field manual for the NLSY79 screening inter-
view (Figure 4). Yet even this relatively detailed passage tells us little
more than the criteria that should NOT be used (person’s name), giving no
indication of what factors the interviewers used to determine a person’s
sex/gender. The passage makes explicit the understanding of sex/gender
we found throughout these surveys—if a person is present, sex/gender
“should be obvious.” This treats sex/gender as visible and easily knowa-
ble, making sex/gender categorization seem straightforward, static, and
natural rather than complex, variable, and socially constructed.
   Out of all the documents we examined, interviewers were instructed to
ask about an individual’s sex/gender if it was “not obvious” in just 14 of 132
survey-years. Most of these were related to determining the gender of some-
one who was not present for the interview. The implication that sex/gender
is not necessarily obvious first appears in the GSS (1975), followed by the
NLSY (1979), and the ANES (2000), but it does not appear regularly or
follow any apparent pattern. Although infrequent, the inclusion of the pos-
sibility that sex/gender categorization might not be obvious is notable
because it demonstrates some alignment with contemporary gender theory.
   The ANES is the only survey to include an “ask if not obvious”–type
instruction for a direct question about the respondent’s sex/gender, and it
did so just twice (in 2002 and 2008). The 2008 version occurred in a
validation survey follow-up conducted by telephone, and is worth exam-
ining in detail (see Figure 5). In this excerpt, the ANES implies sex/gender
is usually obvious, even over the telephone. At the same time, interview-
ers were instructed to tell respondents they are “required to ask” for a sex
category response, despite the fact that they do so only if they were unsure
of the person’s sex/gender. We cannot speak to the specific motivations
for this choice of question wording, but it appears to result from thinking
that asking about sex/gender is “awkward” (e.g., ANES 2008–2009 user’s
guide, Appendix C, 239). The belief that asking about a person’s sex/
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 547
Figure 5:  Rare “Ask If Not Obvious”–Style Question
Source: ANES, 2008–2009, User’s Guide (Appendix E), p. 266.
gender is “awkward” likely stems from a conviction that everyone’s sex/
gender should be obvious, and the perceived implication that there might
be something wrong with a person if it is not.8
   Notably, Figure 5 presents the only example in our data where survey
answer options explicitly indicate whether the sex/gender responses were
the result of interviewer determination or self-identification. By typically
not distinguishing between these two different measurements of gender,
surveys treat them as equivalent. In contrast, measuring them separately
allows researchers to explore the relationship between self-identified and
other-determined gender, an analytical strategy that has been fruitful in
studies of racial inequality (Saperstein 2012).
Sex/Gender as Static Across the Life Course.  As Garfinkel (1967) noted,
before what were then called “sex-change operations” became available
in the 1950s, Americans conceived of the world as comprised solely of
people whose current sex category was the same as the sex they were
assigned at birth (see Figure 6). Since then, Americans have begun to
recognize the possibility, and the legitimacy, of changing sex and gender
(Meyerowitz 2002; Schilt and Westbrook 2009).
   Despite this cultural shift, the surveys we examined continue to reproduce
the same two-by-two table understanding that Garfinkel debunked more than
half a century ago. Not only are transgender possibilities not provided in
moments of gender determination, the words “transgender” or “transsexual”
do not appear anywhere in their documentation. Moreover, three of the four
surveys explicitly state in their materials that any change in sex/gender cat-
egorization from one interview to the next is considered an error. The NLSY
user’s guide stated that sex/gender categorizations of respondents “are sub-
ject to a small degree of error from erroneous interviewer observation and/or
recoding and data entry error. Therefore, when using this series of variables,
a small number of respondents may appear to ‘change’ sex across surveys”
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

548   GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
Figure 6:  A Static Understanding of Sex
Source: Garfinkel (1967), p. 117.
(NLSY 2000, 153). The user’s guide for ANES 2008–2009 similarly noted
that “data on the respondent’s sex, age, country of birth, and other ‘invariant’
characteristics have been found to be inconsistent after repeated measures”
(ANES 2010, 88). Thus, for the ANES, a person’s sex/gender should be as
fixed as one’s year or country of birth. To avoid these “errors,” panel surveys
often require interviewers to double-check that the sex/gender recorded for
each member of the respondent’s household is the same at time 2 as it was
at time 1. When a discrepancy is found, the old data appears to be treated as
erroneous while the new statement of sex/gender is treated as “true.” This
further demonstrates the treatment of sex/gender as obvious; rather than
recognize that different interviewers could categorize someone’s sex/gender
differently, or that changes can occur, the inconsistent codes are assumed to
result from an error at time 1.
    Panel studies also treat sex/gender as static over the life course by sim-
ply carrying forward sex/gender categorizations from previous years, as
three of the four surveys do at various points in their history. The PSID
stopped recording the respondents’ sex/gender in 1989, the NLSY stopped
its annual categorizations in 1998, and the ANES sometimes carries for-
ward the respondent’s sex/gender in its panel studies and sometimes does
not. To justify implementing a “summary” variable, the PSID said that it
had “encountered only one legitimate sex change case throughout the his-
tory of the study” (PSID 1992 manual, 419).
    Thus, the world constructed by these surveys is cisnormative (Bauer
et al. 2009), meaning that it assumes that everyone is cisgender (e.g., that
people do not change sex/gender over time). This practice not only stands
in contrast to current theories of gender, it also does not reflect lived experi-
ences. Transgender people of all sorts exist in the United States, but they do
not exist in the picture of society painted by the surveys we examined and
so cannot exist in analysis and published research that draws from these
data. When all changes over time are considered errors that must be “fixed,”
transgender experiences are literally erased from survey data collection.
                    Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 549
   One explanation for why sex/gender changes are not explicitly recorded
in these surveys is that, if such changes are very rare, including that infor-
mation could compromise the anonymity of the respondents. Of course,
treating all changes in categorization as coding mistakes that need to be
corrected and failing to recognize sex/gender diversity in the first place
(e.g., by offering intersex and transgender response options or asking
separate questions about sex at birth and current gender identity) also
guarantee that large social surveys will continue to find sex/gender diver-
sity to be rare or nonexistent.
   A related objection to including questions that would identify sex/gen-
der variant respondents is that, given the sample size of most surveys, the
number of people identified would be too small for multivariate analysis
(GenIUSS Group 2014). However, without including such questions in
national surveys, it is difficult to estimate the size of a population in the
first place (Gates 2011). Moreover, with a national estimate, small popula-
tions can be intentionally oversampled in future studies and, in cross-
sectional surveys with repeated data collection (such as the ANES and
GSS), data can be pooled across years to facilitate analysis. Surveys also
regularly offer categories for which counts will be too small for most
research purposes, such as American Indians and Native Hawaiians, or
Buddhists and Muslims, when doing so is seen as important for represen-
tation. Given that statistical classification schemes often become taken-
for-granted depictions of the social world (Urla 1993), excluding intersex
and transgender possibilities has consequences well beyond the practice
of a single survey.
The Hyper-Gendered World of Social Surveys
   Gendering moments in surveys are not confined to direct categoriza-
tions of the respondent’s sex/gender. Direct categorization of the
respondent—when the respondent’s sex/gender is being determined
—accounts for just 22 percent of the 1,361 gendering moments we
examined.9 The remaining 78 percent represents a wide variety of other
forms of sex/gender categorization, including the gendering of house-
hold residents or family members, sexual partners, the interviewers
themselves, and hypothetical people in vignettes. Some of these are
phrased as direct questions about the other person’s sex/gender (i.e.,
“What sex is [hh member name]?”). However, most sex/gender determi-
nation is not done through direct categorizations, nor is it signaled by
the term “sex” or “gender.” Instead, gendering in these surveys gener-
ally occurs in more subtle ways.
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

550   GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
Figure 7:  Gendered Relationship Terms
Source: PSID, 2011, Questionnaire, p. 182.
Figure 8:  Mixed Gendered and Gender Neutral Terms
Source: PSID, 1970, Study Design, Procedures, Available Data, p. 245.
Gendering through Relationship Terms.  Surveys often record information
about other people in the respondent’s life, and these people are typically
labeled using gendered terms. For example, rather than count how many
grandchildren a person has, surveys will ask about grandsons and grand-
daughters. This occurs for all relatives and other relationships for whom
there is a gendered term in English, as illustrated in painstaking detail by
the 2011 PSID (Figure 7). This use of gendered relationship terms is a tool
for recording a person’s sex/gender without having to ask (which, as noted
earlier, might be perceived as awkward or rude), but surveys often use
gendered relationship terms even when the data cannot be disaggregated
by sex/gender (Figure 8). Although the PSID codebook could have used
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 551
“sibling” for category 4 and “parent” for category 5, it used instead a pair
of gendered terms for each. It is easy to miss the gendering happening
here compared to a more explicit sex/gender categorization question, and
these moments are rarely, if ever, critiqued by those seeking to improve
surveys. Yet, these hidden moments employ the same conception of sex/
gender as the more explicit survey items, including being binary, deter-
mined by someone other than the person being gendered, seen as obvious,
and not allowed to change over time.
   This is not to say that there are never options included beyond bina-
ries. Gender-neutral terms for some relatives or other relationships
occur frequently, but they are often included in a list of categories along
with pairs of gendered terms. For example, in Figure 8, siblings and
parents are referred to in gendered terms, while children are not (i.e., the
category for children is not called “son or daughter”). It is unclear why
the surveys include lists with mixtures of gendered and gender-neutral
terms, as they follow no perceptible pattern. Gendering of category
labels is unnecessary if the underlying data are undifferentiated, because
it cannot contribute to knowledge about any relationship between gen-
der and other life outcomes. Moreover, with the exception of the term
“partner” (discussed below), gender-neutral terms are never added to
gendered pairs (i.e., there is never a “brother, sister, sibling” nor “son,
daughter, child” answer option). Instead, gender-neutral options stand
alone, presumably functioning as umbrella terms for pairs of gendered
relationship terms.
Gendering through Pronouns.  The conception of gender as binary is
also scattered throughout these surveys in the form of gendered pro-
nouns. Often, interviewers (and, increasingly, computers) are expected
to supply a pronoun based on what is known about a given individual.
For example, the 2008 computer-assisted GSS inserted either mascu-
line or feminine pronouns depending on the category recorded for the
respondent in the variable “SEX” (Figure 9).10 Even when the surveys
ask about topics unrelated to gender or household composition,
respondents and other survey actors are constantly gendered through
these binary pronoun fills. Although the practice likely exists to help
interviewers and respondents follow the referents in the survey ques-
tions, it has the consequence of constraining responses and reinforcing
traditional categories. Gendering through pronouns reproduces an
understanding that sex/gender is binary and the world is composed of
only “hes” and “shes.”
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

552  GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
Figure 9:  Assigning Gendered Pronouns
Source: GSS, 2008, Ballot 1, p. 24.
   The frequency of using gendered pronouns varies across surveys, but
all are peppered with them, because every real or hypothetical person
mentioned in the third person by the interviewer needs, following English
grammar rules, some referent. ANES, the longest-running survey, used
gendered pronouns more than 22,000 times in the documents we exam-
ined—an average of more than 560 per survey-year. This occurs in ubiq-
uitous yet subtle ways, as most interviewers, respondents, and researchers
are so used to hearing and using gendered pronouns and gendered rela-
tionship terms that they are unlikely to notice this reinforcement of the
norm. Thus, overall, these national surveys reflect and produce a hyper-
gendered world—in both explicit and implicit ways, binary, essentialist
gendering is everywhere.
Change Over Time
   Current question wording often reflects understandings of a concept
from the year the survey began, because surveys tend to reuse questions
in order to maintain comparability across years, unless subject to exter-
nal pressure. Over the past several decades, changes in the survey
measurement of race and ethnicity, sexuality, and family structure have
occurred in response to public challenges (e.g., DaCosta 2007; Powell,
Bolzendahl, Geist, and Steelman 2010; Presser 1998). Yet, there has
been far less change in national surveys when it comes to measuring
sex and gender, perhaps because similar concerted efforts are just
beginning to organize. Most of the changes we found were differences
in terminology, and many were superficial in the sense that they were
not employed consistently and did not affect actual measurement prac-
tices. Nevertheless, they are important to highlight, both to recognize
the steps surveys have taken and to help point the way to future
improvements.
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

               Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 553
   One promising change is the introduction of the term “gender,” which
signals some attention to contemporary gender theory. The word first
appeared in the 1978 ANES and was later included in the PSID (1982),
NLSY (1993), and GSS (1996).11 However, gender appears sporadically
even in the most recent surveys and is almost always conflated with sex.
An important step toward the rehabilitation of surveys would be consist-
ently incorporating gender and aligning its operationalization with con-
temporary gender theory.
   Another area of improvement is the use of sex/gender-neutral terms,
which have the potential to challenge normative binary distinctions.
“Spouse” first appeared early in the history of the surveys (ANES 1952),
and “partner” was added to all four surveys in the 1970s. This formula-
tion is typical: “During 1978, did (your husband/wife/partner) receive
any unemployment compensation?” (NLSY 1979, 155). The most dra-
matic shift in terminology in this area occurred in the NLSY: As late as
1993, “husband” and “wife” each appeared 388 times in the survey mate-
rials; by 2010, they appeared three and five times, respectively, replaced
by 129 uses of “partner” and 261 of “spouse.”12 Although the switch to
“partner” may have been prompted more by the rise of cohabitation after
1970 (Smock 2000) than a commitment to sex/gender neutrality per se,
the use of “partner” or “spouse,” particularly when used instead of, rather
than in addition to, “husband” or “wife,” has the potential to destabilize
both sex/gender binaries and the heteronormativity previously reinforced
by survey terminology.
   A third important change in language involves the use of gendered
pronouns: shifting from primarily masculine pronouns to a mix of mascu-
line and feminine pronouns, and occasional attempts to provide sex/gen-
der-neutral alternatives. In the 1948 ANES, across 62 pages of
documentation, there were 63 masculine pronouns and just three feminine
pronouns—each referring to Germany or Russia as “her” (see pre-election
questions 7 and 32). By 2006, the ANES had a more even distribution of
masculine and feminine pronouns at 206 and 165, respectively.13 The GSS
was the only survey to explicitly note changing its gendered terminology.
In 1984, the GSS reworded a question about traits “most desirable for a
child.” The old question prompted respondents to think only of a boy
(e.g., “that he is honest”), while the new version offered “gender-neutral”
language (GSS 2011, 3314). Yet, even in the revised version, normative
understandings of sex/gender remained; item 9 continued to gender the
hypothetical child as masculine and item 7 asked about gender conformity
in binary terms (see Figure 10).
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

554    GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
   HAND                                                                  Most                Least
   CARD                                                             Desirable             Important
     I                                                             A.           B.         C.      D.
                                                               Three          One        Three   One
                                                               Most           Most       Least   Least
                                                               (CODE          (CODE      (CODE   (CODE
                                                               THREE)          ONE)      THREE)   ONE)
       1. that a child has good manners.                            2            1         4        5
       2. that a child tries hard
          to succeed.                                               2            1         4        5
       3. that a child is honest.                                   2            1         4        5
       4. that a child is neat and clean.                           2            1         4        5
       5. that a child has good sense
          and sound judgment.                                       2            1         4        5
       6. that a child has self-control.                            2            1         4        5
       7. that he acts like a boy or
          she acts like a girl.                                     2            1         4        5
       8. that a child gets along well
          with other children.                                      2            1         4        5
       9. that a child obeys his
          parents well.                                             2            1         4        5
      10. that a child is responsible.                              2            1         4        5
      11. that a child is considerate
          of others.                                                2            1         4        5
      12. that a child is interested in
          how and why things happen.                                2            1         4        5
      13. that a child is a good student.                           2            1         4        5
Figure 10:  Partial Gender Neutrality
Source: GSS, 1984, Questionnaire, p. 31.
   It is clear from these examples that surveys can and do change.
However, the changes thus far seem sporadic and ad hoc rather than
concerted attempts to align surveys with contemporary gender theory
and lived experiences. Indeed, some changes actually widen the gap
between theory and methods, as when the PSID and NLSY both
switched from recording annual categorizations of sex/gender to treat-
ing sex/gender as static by carrying it forward from a single previous
year. As surveys continue to evolve, a systematic effort should be made
to assess whether the incorporation of sex and gender, in both direct
measurement and terminology, is justified by specific research goals.
We do not advocate removing sex and gender from surveys in their
entirety, as that would make it impossible to study their role in inequal-
ity; rather, we encourage an acknowledgment of sex and gender fluidity
                  Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

              Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 555
and diversity within, as well as beyond, traditional categories. The occa-
sional moments of sex/gender-neutrality we observed demonstrate how
easy it would be to change binary language in these texts when its inclu-
sion does not further knowledge. Change—even to large-scale, long-
running surveys—is possible.
                                       Conclusion
   Gender scholars cannot simply dismiss survey research, as many have
in the past; a thorough examination of the operationalization of sex and
gender in U.S. social surveys is overdue. Even the most recent scholar-
ship, focused on inclusion for transgender respondents, critiques only
direct questions about the respondent’s sex and gender. These efforts point
to important avenues for improvement, including asking separate ques-
tions about sex at birth and current gender identity, expanding the number
of answer options beyond “male” and “female,” and acknowledging
diversity in gender expression (GenIUSS Group 2014). However, our
findings indicate that, while these changes will help surveys better repre-
sent the diversity of lived experience, they do little to close the gap
between contemporary gender theory and survey practices. To do so,
surveys must also consistently distinguish between the concepts of sex
and gender, incorporate self-identified sex and gender, provide clear cri-
teria or instructions for how to determine sex and gender, acknowledge
change in sex and gender over the life course, and rethink the necessity of
employing binary sex and gender categories throughout the survey mate-
rials.
   Making these additional changes should allow for a clearer under-
standing of the sex/gender system and improve the effectiveness of
research working to reduce inequality. For example, recording variation
over time for both sex and gender will facilitate research into both the
prevalence and correlates of sex and gender fluidity over the life course.
We hesitate to outline more specific guidelines for the rehabilitation of
surveys, in part because we aim to encourage rather than constrain crea-
tivity in designing new methods of measurement. New ways of opera-
tionalizing sex and gender also need to be thoroughly tested before being
widely adopted.
   We do not expect survey measures to be perfect, nor do we hold them
to a higher standard than we would other research methods. But the influ-
ence of data from large-scale social surveys in undeniable, and the gap
                 Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

556    GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
between our theory and our methods yawns more widely for sex and
gender than for many other core social science concepts. We will never
know what we may have sacrificed, in terms of deeper understanding of
inequality and the sex/gender system, until we address these enduring
problems. 
                                                 Notes
    1. Cisgender people identify with the same sex and gender categories to which
they were assigned at birth (Schilt and Westbrook 2009). 
    2. There is a long-running related debate in psychology about how to measure
“masculinity” and “femininity” (Auster and Ohm 2000; Constantinople 1973),
but an underlying assumption of binary sex categorization remains, because these
traits are generally considered characteristic of people who are easily distin-
guished as males and females (cf. Spence 2011). 
    3. See http://www.norc.org/research/projects/pages/general-social-survey.
aspx (accessed May 17, 2014). 
    4. We use “gendering” for all instances when sex and/or gender categories,
including pronouns, are applied to the respondent or others within the
survey. 
    5. Given our strategy for selecting excerpts, we expect that these figures
underestimate the hidden gendering in these surveys, because we coded every
direct categorization of the respondent’s sex or gender but extracted only unique
examples of other genderings (i.e., we did not extract and code every reference to
he/she, brother/sister, or husband/wife in the text). 
    6. Surprisingly, these specialty surveys also use wording that conflates sex
and gender. For example, the GenIUSS Group (2014, v.) recommends
using “male” and “female” as answer options for “current gender identity”
questions. 
    7. The 2010 ANES was a panel recontact study that did not remeasure the
respondent’s sex/gender. In 2012 (which was not part of our original data set), the
ANES reverted to interviewer determination of the respondent’s sex/gender “by
observation”; although interviewers could mark “DK” (don’t know) if they were
“unsure.” If the interviewer did not enter a sex/gender classification, respondents
were later asked whether they were “male or female” in the computer-assisted
self-interviewing portion of the survey. 
    8. This logic quickly becomes circular: the question will seem “awkward”
as long as surveys avoid asking it and, when they do ask, apologize for doing
so.
    9. This number (299 of 1,361) is greater than the total number of survey-years
because we collected variable frequencies along with questionnaires, and respond-
ents are occasionally gendered more than once within a survey (such as when
                    Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

                Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 557
interviewers are instructed to skip a series of questions for particular types of
respondents, such as pregnancy histories for males).
   10. Note, too, the heteronormativity in this excerpt; in it, only females have
husbands and only males have wives.
   11. The first use in the ANES described a code for open-ended responses given
to a question about reasons for liking or disliking a political candidate (“0461.
Gender e.g. ‘She’s a woman’”).
   12. By the mid-1980s, “partner” is used frequently in all of the surveys except
for the PSID, which uses the term 12 times total.
   13. Interestingly, in the 1980s and 1990s, the PSID included many more
feminine pronouns, as it assumed a male respondent and had questions about the
respondent’s wife or heterosexual partner written in the third person.
                                         References
American National Election Study. http://www.electionstudies.org/studypages/
    download/datacenter_all_NoData.php.
Auster, Carol, and Susan Ohm. 2000. Masculinity and femininity in contempo-
    rary American society. Sex Roles 43:499-528.
Balarajan, Meera, Michelle Gray, and Martin Mitchell. 2011. Monitoring equal-
    ity: Developing a gender identity question. London: Equality and Human
    Rights Commission.
Bauer, Greta R., Rebecca Hammond, Robb Travers, Matthias Kaay, Karin M.
    Hohenadel, and Michelle Boyce. 2009. “I don’t think this is theoretical; this is
    our lives”: How erasure impacts health care for transgender people. Journal of
    the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care 20:348-61.
Berger, Peter, and Thomas Luckmann. 1967. The social construction of reality.
    New York: Doubleday.
Bird, Chloe, and Patricia Rieker. 2008. Gender and health. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
    bridge University Press.
Bowker, Geoffrey, and Susan Star. 2000. Sorting things out: Classification and its
    consequences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brewster, Karin, and Irene Padavic. 2000. Change in gender-ideology, 1977–
    1996. Journal of Marriage and Family 62:477-87.
Cavanagh, Sheila. 2010. Queering bathrooms. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Univer-
    sity of Toronto Press.
Connell, Raewyn. 1995. Masculinities. Oakland: University of California Press.
Constantinople, Anne. 1973. Masculinity-femininity: An exception to the famous
    dictum? Psychological Bulletin 80:389-407.
Cowan, Sharon. 2005. Gender is no substitute for sex. Feminist Legal Studies
    13:67-96.
Cruz, Taylor. 2014. Assessing access to care for transgender and gender noncon-
    forming people. Social Science & Medicine 110:65-73.
                   Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

558    GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
DaCosta, Kimberly. 2007. Making multiracials. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
    sity Press.
Fausto-Sterling, Anne. 2000. Sexing the body. New York: Basic Books.
Garfinkel, Harold. 1967. Studies in ethnomethodology. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
    Prentice Hall.
Gates, Gary. 2011. How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender?
    Los Angeles: The Williams Institute.
General Social Survey. http://www3.norc.org/gss+website/publications/documen
    tation.
GenIUSS Group. 2014. Best practices for asking questions to identify transgen-
    der and other gender minority respondents on population-based surveys. Los
    Angeles: Williams Institute.
Halberstam, Judith. 1998. Female masculinity. Durham, NC: Duke University
    Press.
Hammarstrom, Anne, and Ellen Annandale. 2012. A conceptual muddle: An
    empirical analysis of the use of “sex” and “gender” in “gender-specific medi-
    cine” journals. PLoS One 7:e34193.
Harnois, Catherine. 2013. Feminist measures in survey research. Thousand Oaks,
     CA: Sage.
Harrison, Jack, Jaime Grant, and Jody Herman. 2011. A gender not listed here.
     LGBTQ Policy Journal 2:13-24.
Hox, Joop. 1997. From theoretical concept to survey question. In Survey measure-
    ment and process quality, edited by Lars Lyberg, Paul Biemer, Martin Collins,
    Edith De Leeuw, Cathryn Dippo, Norbert Schwarz, and Dennis Trewin. Hobo-
    ken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience.
Human Rights Watch. 2011. Human rights violations against trans people in the
     Netherlands. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Igo, Sarah. 2007. The averaged American. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
     Press.
Institute of Medicine. 2011. The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
     people. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Krosnick, Jon, and Stanley Presser. 2010. Question and questionnaire design. In
     Handbook of survey research, edited by Peter Marsden and James Wright.
     Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Lorber, Judith. 1993. Believing is seeing: Biology as ideology. Gender & Society
    7:568-81.
Lucal, Betsy. 1999. What it means to be gendered me. Gender & Society 13:
     781-97.
Meyerowitz, Joanne. 2002. How sex changed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
    sity Press.
Mills, Sara. 1997. Discourse. Florence, KY: Routledge.
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979. https://www.nlsinfo.org/content/
    cohorts/nlsy79/other-documentation.
                   Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

                Westbrook and Saperstein / New Categories Are Not Enough 559
Neuendorf, Kimberly. 2002. The content analysis guidebook. Thousand Oaks,
   CA: Sage.
Nicholson, Linda. 1994. Interpreting gender. Signs 20:79-105.
Oakley, Ann. 1998. Gender, methodology and people’s ways of knowing. Sociol-
   ogy 32:707-31.
Oakley, Ann, and Robin Oakley. 1979. Sexism in official statistics. In Demystify-
   ing social statistics, edited by John Irvine, Ian Mills, and Jeff Evans. London:
   Pluto Press.
Panel Study of Income Dynamics. https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/guide/default.
   aspx.
Powell, Brian, Catherine Bolzendahl, Claudia Geist, and Lala Carr Steelman.
   2010. Counted out: Same-sex relations and Americans’ definitions of family.
   New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Presser, Harriet. 1998. Decapitating the U.S. Census Bureau’s “head of house-
   hold.” Feminist Economics 4:145-58.
Pryzgoda, Jayde, and Joan Chrisler. 2000. Definitions of gender and sex. Sex
   Roles 43:553-69.
Randall, Sara, Ernestine Coast, and Tiziana Leone. 2011. Cultural construc-
   tions of the concept of household in sample surveys. Population Studies 65:
   217-29.
Ridgeway, Cecilia. 2011. Framed by gender. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rubin, Gayle. 1975. The traffic in women. In Toward an anthropology of women,
   edited by Rayna Reiter. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Saperstein, Aliya. 2012. Capturing complexity in the United States: Which aspects
   of race matter and when? Ethnic and Racial Studies 35:1484-1502.
Saperstein, Aliya, Laurel Westbrook, and Devon Magliozzi. 2015. Gender grada-
   tions: Measuring sex and gender diversity in surveys. Paper presented at the
   Population Association of America Annual Meeting, San Diego, May 1.
Schaeffer, Nora, and Jennifer Dykema. 2011. Questions for surveys. Public Opin-
   ion Quarterly 75:909-61.
Schaeffer, Nora, and Stanley Presser. 2003. The science of asking questions.
   Annual Review of Sociology 29:65-88.
Schilt, Kristen, and Jenifer Bratter. 2015. From multiracial to transgender? Assess-
   ing attitudes toward expanding gender options on the U.S. Census. Transgen-
   der Studies Quarterly 2:77-100.
Schilt, Kristen, and Laurel Westbrook. 2009. Doing gender, doing heteronorma-
   tivity. Gender & Society 23:440-64.
Settersten, Richard, Jr., and Karl Mayer. 1997. The measurement of age, age
   structuring, and the life course. Annual Review of Sociology 23:233-61.
Smock, Pamela. 2000. Cohabitation in the United States. Annual Review of Soci-
   ology 26:1-20.
Snipp, C. Matthew. 2003. Racial measurement in the American census. Annual
   Review of Sociology 29:563-88.
                   Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

560    GENDER & SOCIETY/August 2015
Spade, Dean. 2011. Normal life: Administrative violence, critical trans politics,
     and the limits of the law. Boston: South End Press.
Spence, Janet. 2011. Off with the old, on with the new. Psychology of Women
    Quarterly 35:504-9.
Sprague, Joey. 2005. Feminist methodologies for critical researchers. Lanham,
    MD: AltaMira Press.
Stacey, Judith, and Barrie Thorne. 1985. The missing feminist revolution in soci-
    ology. Social Problems 32:301-16.
Titscher, Stefan, Michael Meyer, Ruth Wodak, and Eva Vetter. 2000. Methods of
     text and discourse analysis: In search of meaning. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Undurraga, Rosario. 2010. How quantitative are feminist research methods text-
     books? International Journal of Social Research Methodology 13:277-81.
Urla, Jacqueline. 1993. Cultural politics in an age of statistics. American Ethnolo-
    gist 20:818-43.
Valentine, David. 2007. Imagining transgender. Durham, NC: Duke University
     Press.
West, Candace, and Don Zimmerman. 1987. Doing gender. Gender & Society
    1:125-51.
Westbrook, Laurel, and Kristen Schilt. 2014. Doing gender, determining gender:
    Transgender people, gender panics, and the maintenance of the sex/gender/
    sexuality system. Gender & Society 28:32-57.
Wickes, Rebecca, and Michael Emmison. 2007. They are all doing gender but are
     they all passing? The Sociological Review 55:311-30.
Williams, Christine. 2006. Still missing? Comments on the twentieth anniversary
     of “the missing feminist revolution in sociology.” Social Problems 53:454-58.
Zerubavel, Eviatar. 1996. Lumping and splitting: Notes on social classification.
    Sociological Forum 11:421-33.
   Laurel Westbrook is an associate professor of sociology at Grand Valley
   State University. Her research focuses on the inner workings of the sex/
   gender/sexuality system, including how knowledge production, gendered
   violence, and social movements both maintain and alter the system. She is
   currently completing a book on “identity-based anti-violence activism.”
   Aliya Saperstein is an assistant professor of sociology at Stanford University
   whose work examines how categories of difference are operationalized in
   survey research and the consequences of these methodological decisions
   for studies of stratification. Previous research highlighted how fluidity in
   racial categorization reinforces racial inequality in the United States.
                    Downloaded from gas.sagepub.com at MORGAN STATE UNIV on March 29, 2016

